                                             Accelerated Sampling from Masked Diffusion
                                             Models via Entropy Bounded Unmasking
                                             Heli Ben-Hamu , Itai Gat , Daniel Severo , Niklas Nolte , Brian Karrer

                                             FAIR at Meta

                                             Recent masked diffusion models (MDMs) have shown competitive performance compared to autore-
                                             gressive models (ARMs) for language modeling. While most literature has focused on performance
                                             enhancing sampling procedures, efficient sampling from MDMs has been scarcely explored. We
                                             make the observation that often a given sequence of partially masked tokens determines the values
                                             of multiple unknown tokens deterministically, meaning that a single prediction of a masked model




arXiv:2505.24857v1 [cs.LG] 30 May 2025
                                             holds additional information unused by standard sampling procedures. Based on this observation,
                                             we introduce EB-Sampler, a simple drop-in replacement for existing samplers, utilizing an Entropy
                                             Bounded unmasking procedure that dynamically unmasks multiple tokens in one function evaluation
                                             with predefined approximate error tolerance. We formulate the EB-Sampler as part of a broad family
                                             of adaptive samplers for which we provide an error analysis that motivates our algorithmic choices.
                                             EB-Sampler accelerates sampling from current state of the art MDMs by roughly 2-3x on standard
                                             coding and math reasoning benchmarks without loss in performance. We also validate the same
                                             procedure works well on smaller reasoning tasks including maze navigation and Sudoku, tasks ARMs
                                             often struggle with.

                                             Date: June 11, 2025
                                             Correspondence: Heli Ben-Hamu at helib@meta.com




                                         1   Introduction
                                         Motivated by the success of diffusion and flow (Esser et al., 2024; Polyak et al., 2024) models in continuous
                                         domains (e.g., images, video), research efforts have focused on adapting these frameworks to discrete state
                                         spaces. Many of these approaches (Austin et al., 2021a; Lou et al., 2023; Sahoo et al., 2024; Campbell
                                         et al., 2024; Gat et al., 2024; Kitouni et al., 2024) utilize the masked modeling paradigm, thus we generally
                                         refer to these approaches as Masked Diffusion Models (MDMs). Recent large MDMs such as LLaDa (Nie
                                         et al., 2025b) and Dream (Ye et al., 2025) have shown competitive performance compared to similarly sized
                                         autoregressive models (ARMs) in the 7 billion parameter range on traditional language tasks including code,
                                         text, and mathematical reasoning benchmarks. These results open the possibility of scaled non-autoregressive
                                         generation for language using MDMs, a possible competitor to large language models (LLMs).
                                         Abstractly, MDMs sample fixed-length sequences as discrete tokens from a vocabulary. They begin from a
                                         sequence of mask tokens and iteratively update tokens until all tokens are unmasked. Replacing a masked
                                         token with a token from the vocabulary is unmasking. In contrast to standard ARMs, the order in which
                                         tokens are unmasked becomes a design choice. Recent models often leverage samplers that surpass the
                                         performance of random order unmasking, deviating from the masked diffusion process used at training (Austin
                                         et al., 2021a). In particular, LLaDa and Dream achieve strong performance by unmasking tokens in a much
                                         more favorable order dictated by model predictions (Chang et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2023).
                                         Performance is not the only criteria by which large MDMs have become popular. Another additional important
                                         aspect is efficient computation. While MDMs cannot reuse past computation via key-value caching like ARMs
                                         due to full attention, MDMs offer an exciting alternative route to efficiency via the opportunity to sample
                                         multiple tokens simultaneously. MDM efficiency is captured by the number of function evaluations (NFE)
                                         which is directly controlled via the sampler. The default for more efficient sampling of MDMs like LLaDa and
                                         Dream is to unmask a fixed number of tokens each step. Unfortunately, generation quality degrades quickly
                                         as more unmasked tokens are sampled independently and hence this opportunity has been thus far unrealized.


                                                                                                  1
Developing an MDM sampler for language that simultaneously achieves good performance and efficiency is
the focus of this work.
Our approach is motivated by two empirical observations. The first is the strong performance of unmasking
orders determined by the model, which indicates the associated predictions aligned with that order may have
low model error, i.e. match the desired optimal distribution. The second is that multiple masked tokens
are often predicted with high certainty, or, equivalently, low entropy. Intuitively, masked tokens that have
both low model error and low entropy can be unmasked in parallel, which we propose to exploit with our
approach. By strategically unmasking such tokens, a sampler can follow high performance unmasking orders
while avoiding error due to independently unmasking tokens.
We realize these intuitions and make them concrete and precise via our main contributions:
      • We propose an adaptive sampler for masked diffusion models called EB-Sampler (short for Entropy
        Bounded Sampler), that decides both which tokens to unmask and how many tokens to unmask at each
        step using an entropy bound that approximately limits the dependence of unmasked tokens.
      • EB-Sampler is a simple drop-in replacement to existing samplers and can be directly applied to sample
        from existing masked diffusion models without further training.
      • EB-Sampler accelerates sampling from the best performing masked diffusion models (LLaDa and Dream)
        by 2-3x on standard coding and math reasoning benchmarks without loss in performance. We provide
        Pareto fronts between efficiency and performance and conclude EB-Sampler is superior across most
        settings. We also validate EB-Sampler works well on smaller reasoning tasks, including maze navigation
        and Sudoku.
      • We show EB-Sampler is a member of a broad family of adaptive multi-token samplers for masked diffusion
        models. Our theory explains why this family samples correctly, why it can leverage a pre-trained masked
        diffusion model, and provides an intuitive error decomposition into model error and joint dependence
        error that motivates the design of EB-Sampler.


2      Preliminaries

2.1     Notations
Consider a discrete state space denoted S = T d , of sequences of length d over a finite sized vocabulary
T = [K] = {1, 2, . . . , K}. A state, x ∈ S, is a sequence of elements, often called tokens, from the vocabulary
T , where x = (x1 , x2 , . . . , xd ) with each element xl ∈ T . We denote the set of indices of a sequence in
S with I = [d] = {1, 2, . . . , d}. For masked modeling, we extend our vocabulary to include a mask token,
m. If index l or token xl is described as masked, then xl = m and if unmasked, xl ̸= m. Finally, for a
random variable X = (X 1 , X 2 , . . . , X d ) and a set A ⊆ I, we define the notation for conditional probabilities
p(xl |xA ) = P(X l = xl |{X i = xi |i ∈ A}).

2.2     Masked diffusion models
Given a finite set of samples D ⊆ S drawn from an unknown target data distribution X ∼ q, most MDMs,
with few exceptions, have been proven to learn to model clean data conditionals q(xl |xM̄ ) (Ou et al., 2025;
Zheng et al., 2024) where M̄ ⊆ I is a set, possibly empty, of unmasked token indices. The main difference
from BERT-like masked language modeling (Devlin et al., 2019) is that BERT-like models are trained on a
fixed masking ratio, as opposed to all possible masks. In particular, the MDMs we consider learn factorized
conditional predictions of pθ (xl |xM̄ ), using full attention, for all l masked tokens, that ideally match q(xl |xM̄ ),
for every possible M̄ . Sampling with trained factorized conditionals can be done sequentially, unmasking one
token at a time. This baseline sampler can be defined as follows: At each step (i) randomly pick an index to
unmask, e.g., l; (ii) sample from learned factorized conditional distribution X l ∼ pθ (xl |xM̄ ), where M̄ is the
set of currently masked tokens. We refer to this sampling procedure as random unmasking.




                                                           2
                                                                          EB step
                                                                                              1          2                     3            4        5
          1       2             3            4        5
                                                                          p θ(x l | x z<1)   for
x z<1    for     m              m            m       m

                                                                                                         5                     3            4        2
x z<2    for     m           in              m      :\n                    Order of unmasking
                                                                                                       = err( )              = err( )   = err( )   = err(   )
                                                                            Sort by error proxy

x z<3    for   string        in         strings     :\n
                                                                                                         5                     3            4        2
                                                                            Choose how many
                                                                               to unmask
                z = ({1}, {3,5}, {2,4}, ∅, ∅)
                                                                             Bounded entropy
                                                                                                         cumsum_entropy − cummax_entropy ≤ γ



Figure 1 Illustration of an unmasking step with EB-Sampler. At each step EB sampler determines which tokens to
unmask by ordering according to an error proxy and then chooses how many tokens to independently unmask by
bounding their joint dependence via model prediction entropies.


3       Known challenges of MDM sampling
We now discuss two challenges in sampling from MDMs. The connections we draw between these challenges
will support the intuition for the construction of the EB-Sampler in the next section.

3.1     Order of unmasking matters
                                                                                                                        80
For the optimal factorized conditionals predictor, the order of sequential                                                     Random
                                                                                                                               Confidence
unmasking will not change the underlying model distribution, pθ (x).                                                           Entropy
                                                                                                                        60
That is, by the chain rule of probability, for any two permutations                                                            Margin



                                                                                                         Accuracy (%)
(orders of unmasking) σ, σ ′ :
                                                                                                                        40

                                     pθσ (x) = pθσ′ (x)
             Qd                                                                      20
where pθσ = l=1 pθ (xσ(l) |x∪j<l σ(j) ). Nevertheless, training an optimal
pθ is intractable due to both learning on extremely high dimensional                  0
state spaces with limited model capacity and finite data and no hard con-                   MBPP        GSM8K
straints on the modeling itself such that the chain rule holds. Formally, it
                                                                                Figure 2 Performance of greedy sam-
means that there exists local model error DKL (q(xl |xM̄ ), pθ (xl |xM̄ )) > 0.
                                                                                pling with various unmasking criteria
A key consequence is that the total model error, i.e., the discrepancy
                                                                                from LLaDa 8B Base model.
between the data distribution, q(x), and the model distribution for a
certain order of unmasking, pσ (x), depends on the order of unmasking. A question that arises then is, do
                                 θ

MDMs manage to learn such there are unmasking orders with low total model error? If so, can one find local
model error proxies such that the chosen unmasking order will result in low total model error?
Recent works (Nie et al., 2025a,b; Kim et al., 2025; Ye et al., 2025) proposed sequential greedy sampling with
unmasking orders dictated by one of the following criteria (Chang et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2025; Zheng et al.,
2023) for choosing the next coordinate l to unmask:

                                                                              ′
                           Confidence: l = argmax [max
                                                     ′
                                                       pθ (xl |xM̄ )]
                                                     l′ ∈M   xl
                                                                  ′
                                    Entropy: l = argmin [H(X l |X M̄ = xM̄ )]                                                                               (1)
                                                     l′ ∈M
                                                                      ′                            ′
                                    Margin: l = argmax [pθ (X l = y1 |xM̄ ) − pθ (X l = y2 |xM̄ )]
                                                     l′ ∈M

                                         ′
where (y1 , y2 ) = arg Top2 pθ (xl |xM̄ ) and H(p) = −                    x p(x) log p(x) is the entropy of p.                          Greedy samplers
                                                                  P
                          xl′
show superior performance compared to random unmasking samplers, as shown in Figure 2, closing the gap


                                                                  3
in performance between MDMs and ARMs (Nie et al., 2025b; Ye et al., 2025). This answers the first part of
the question above, indicating the existence of orders with lower total model error. As for the second part, on
how to find those unmasking orders, Figure 2 shows that the criteria in Equation (1) can serve as local model
error proxies, determining an unmasking order with low(er) total model error.

3.2   Sampling efficiency
The best performing sampling procedures for language MDMs described                40
above, similarly to ARMs, predict one token per function evaluation,               35
hence the efficiency of MDMs remains a disadvantage compared to                    30


                                                                                         Accuracy (%)
ARMs due to costly computations of full attention that does not allow              25
KV-caching. An avenue for improving sampling efficiency of MDMs is                 20
                                                                                   15
to make use of the model predictions on all masked tokens to unmask                                      LLaDa 8B
                                                                                   10
multiple tokens per function evaluation. Common multi-token unmask-                 5
                                                                                                         Top-k, confidence
                                                                                                         Top-k, entropy
ing procedures unmask a fixed number of tokens, k, at each step by                  0
                                                                                                         Top-k, margin

sampling independently from the predicted factorized conditionals. We                    100   200   300     400       500
                                                                                                   NFE
refer to these approaches as Top-k sampling, and they can all be cast          Figure 3 Efficiency-accuracy tradeoff
in terms of choosing the Top-k lowest model error proxy tokens to be           of Top-k (NFE) sampling on MBPP.
unmasked at each step. The parameter k tunes an efficiency-accuracy
tradeoff. The larger k is, the larger the joint dependence error will be, as it wrongly assumes independence of
a fixed number of tokens at every step. Figure 3 empirically shows the degradation in performance in Top-k
sampling for k ∈ {1, 2, 4, 8, 16} with various error proxies.


4     Entropy Bounded (EB) Sampler
The previous section described how challenges in MDM sampling come from two distinct sources of error:
local model error and joint dependence error. Controlling these errors motivates our Entropy Bounded (EB)
Sampler, a direct replacement for Top-k samplers.
Section 3.1 found that not only do masked tokens with low model error likely exist, but that past research has
already identified proxies computable via model predictions that identify these tokens in Equation (1). A step
in EB-Sampler begins by sorting unmasked tokens in ascending order on this error proxy, exactly as in Top-k
samplers. Then Section 3.2 showed Top-k sampling accumulates substantial joint dependence error that harms
performance by sampling tokens independently. We now make the additional observation that MDM predictions
are often highly confident about multiple masked tokens simultaneously. These tokens are predicted to have low
dependence in the data distribution q, because these tokens are all predicted to have low entropy. EB-Sampler
therefore defines a threshold γ ≥ 0 and decides to unmask the largest subset U of sorted masked tokens such that

                                    X
                                          H(pθ (xl |xM̄ )) − max H(pθ (xl |xM̄ )) ≤ γ.                                 (2)
                                                            l∈U
                                    l∈U


When U is comprised of low model error tokens, this expression approximately bounds a rigorous joint
dependence error introduced later in Section 5. Figure 1 visually illustrates a step of EB-Sampler.
Python code showing Top-k sampling and EB-Sampler is provided in Figure 4, where EB-Sampler is shown
to be a minimal change in PyTorch. Like Top-k sampling, EB-Sampler is easily compatible with ad hoc
adjustments like temperature and unsupervised classifier-free guidance that alter pθ .
Consider this code with the same inputs. Different outputs are only from EB-Sampler determining the value
of k using the entropy bound of Equation (2). When unmasked tokens have low dependence, EB-Sampler will
unmask more tokens, and conversely, when there is (potentially) high dependence, EB-Sampler will unmask
less tokens. The amount of tokens unmasked per step in EB-Sampler is therefore not fixed. More function
evaluations are used when the sample is predicted complex and less when the sample is predicted simple. The
threshold γ influences the number of steps where γ = 0 will unmask one token each step and γ = ∞ will
unmask all tokens at once.


                                                             4
1    def top_k_step(x, model, sample_fn, error_proxy_fn, k):                   def EB_step(x, model, sample_fn, error_proxy_fn, gamma):
2        p = model(x)                                                               p = model(x)
3        err = error_proxy_fn(p)                                                    err = error_proxy_fn(p)
4        err = torch.where(x == model.mask_id, err, np.inf)                         err = torch.where(x == model.mask_id, err, np.inf)
5        _ , ids = torch.sort(err, dim=-1)                                          _ , ids = torch.sort(err, dim=-1)
6                                                                               +   entropy = torch.distributions.Categorical(probs=p).entropy()[ids]
7                                                                               +   acc_entropy = torch.cumsum(entropy)
8                                                                               +   cummax_entropy = torch.cummax(entropy, dim=0).values
9                                                                               +   k = (acc_entropy - cummax_entropy <= gamma).sum()
10       k = torch.minimum(k, (x == model.mask_id).sum())                           k = torch.minimum(k, (x == model.mask_id).sum())
11       ids_to_unmask = ids[:k]                                                    ids_to_unmask = ids[:k]
12       x[ids_to_unmask] = sample_fn(p, ids_to_unmask)                             x[ids_to_unmask] = sample_fn(p, ids_to_unmask)
13       return x                                                                   return x

     Figure 4 Python code implementation of a single sampling step for common Top-k approaches and for EB-Sampler.



     5    Adaptive unmasking samplers
     In this section, we formulate the EB-Sampler as a member of a more general family of adaptive multi-token
     samplers. The object we use to mathematically describe varying length unmasking steps is an ordered partition
     I, denoted by z = (z1 , z2 , . . . , zd ), where z satisfies:
                                                            d
                                                            [
                                                                  zi = I,          zi ∩ zj = ∅                                               (3)
                                                            i=1

     and either zi ⊆ I or zi = ∅. Notation z<i denotes ordered sub-partitions up to index i, that is z<i = (zj |j ∈
     [i − 1]).
     For a random variable X = (X 1 , X 2 , . . . , X d ) over S and ordered sub-partitions s, s′ , we extend the notation
     from Section 2.1 for conditional probabilities:

                                             ′
                                                                                                                       
                                   p(xs |xs ) = P        X l = xl , ∀l ∈ Is                    X j = xj , ∀j ∈ Is′                           (4)
                                                                                           


                S|s|                S|s′ |
     where Is = i=1 si and Is′ = i=1 s′i . Depending on context, we will also be using the notation in Equation (4)
     with s being a set of indices, e.g., s = zi or a single index, e.g., s = l.
     We consider a broad family of sampling procedures defined by ϕ that leverage approximate clean data
     conditionals provided by pθ , and produce a joint distribution pϕ (x, z) over state x and partition z:
                                       d                                       d
                                                                                                                !
                                       Y                                       Y       Y
                         pϕ (x, z) =                   zi
                                             pϕ (zi , x |x   z<i
                                                                   , z<i ) =                    θ   l
                                                                                               p (x |x   z<i
                                                                                                               ) ϕ(zi |xz<i , z<i ).         (5)
                                       i=1                                     i=1    l∈zi

     The distributions ϕ enforce z is a valid partition, and sampling zi means token indices zi are unmasked at
     step i. Without loss of generality, ϕ always unmasks at least one token if possible, i.e. only samples zi = ∅
     when z<i = I. Similarly define
                                              d
                                              Y                                      d
                                                                                     Y
                               qϕ (x, z) =          q(zi , xzi |xz<i , z<i ) =             q(xzi |xz<i )ϕ(zi |xz<i , z<i ).                  (6)
                                              i=1                                    i=1

                                  Qd
     Importantly, qϕ (x, z) = q(x) i=1 ϕ(zi |xz<i , z<iP
                                                       ), because the product of the clean data conditionals does not
     depend on the order of unmasking, z, so that z qϕ (x, z) = q(x) for any ϕ.
     Expressiveness of ϕ.  This family encompasses existing common samplers that always unmask the same
     number of tokens on each step, such as deterministic samplers of Top-k smallest margin, Top-k smallest
     entropy, and Top-k confidence, or simple random unmasking, but also contains additional options, including
     dynamically determining the number of tokens to unmask at each step.




                                                                               5
Error decomposition.       We quantify the error from sampling pϕ (x) =                       z pϕ (x, z) instead of q(x) via KL
                                                                                           P
divergence
                                                                      d
                                                                      X                                  X
          DKL (q(x), pϕ (x)) ≤ DKL (qϕ (x, z), pϕ (x, z)) =                 Eqϕ [ln q(xzi |xz<i ) −              ln pθ (xl |xz<i )].
                                                                      i=1                                l∈z i

Appendix A.1 discusses when this is an equality, and proves this can be rewritten into two terms
                 d
                 X             X                                                                  Y
                       Eqϕ [       DKL (q(xl |xz<i ), pθ (xl |xz<i )) + DKL (q(xzi |xz<i ),              q(xl |xz<i ))].               (7)
                 i=1       l∈zi                                                                   l∈zi
                           |                     {z                 }      |                {z                          }
                                           model error                             joint dependence error


Model error comes from sampling incorrect conditionals pθ that do not match the data distribution.
Joint dependence error comes from sampling tokens independently that are not actually independent in
q. This second KL divergence is precisely joint mutual information, upper-bounded by
                                    Y                 X
                DKL (q(xzi |xz<i ),   q(xl |xz<i )) ≤   H(q(xl |xz<i )) − max H(q(xl |xz<i )).   (8)
                                                                                           l∈zi
                                          l∈zi                 l∈zi

Choosing ϕ given a pre-trained model.   EB-Sampler is directly motivated by this error decomposition. The
pθ that achieves zero model error is the same for any ϕ, justifying using any pre-trained model learned to
match clean data conditionals. Assume we can identify low model error tokens and we design ϕ to only select
zi from such tokens, where for all l ∈ zi , pθ (xl |xz<i ) ≈ q(xl |xz<i ). Then model error is negligible and joint
dependence error is approximately upper-bounded by
                                 X
                                      H(pθ (xl |xz<i )) − max H(pθ (xl |xz<i )),                                (9)
                                                                    l∈zi
                                         l∈zi

our criteria in Equation (2). So after adaptively identifying low model error tokens, ϕ can control overall
error by selecting subsets of such tokens to unmask with bounded joint dependence. EB-Sampler applies this
approach with the model error proxies from Section 3.1.


6     Experiments
We evaluate the performance of the EB-Sampler on standard code and math reasoning generation tasks
and on logic puzzles solving. The empirical findings in this section support our theoretical derivations and
demonstrate the proposed sampler’s capabilities.
Baselines. We compare the EB-Sampler to Top-k samplers with the three error proxy functionals described in
Equation (1): (i) confidence; (ii) entropy; and (iii) margin.
Experimental setting. On all tasks and models we follow the same general experimental setting. We test the
EB-Sampler with a range of thresholds, γ, depending on the task. For the Top-k samplers we test a range of k
values. Each point in the plots (e.g., Figure 5) corresponds to the resulting model performance when sampling
with parameter γ or k for EB or Top-k sampler respectively. After finding temperature was unhelpful for
LLaDa, we used zero temperature sampling for all experiments. Full details on threshold and k values can be
found in Appendix C.

6.1   Code and math reasoning
We evaluate the performance of the EB-Sampler variants on text generation tasks in which (i) success can be
measured quantitatively; and (ii) require an answer that is longer than a single token. These two properties
facilitate quantitative assessment of the efficiency-accuracy tradeoff a sampler exhibits.
Models. We report results on two recent open source state-of-the-art language MDMs: LLaDa 8B Base (Nie
et al., 2025b) and Dream 7B Base (Ye et al., 2025).


                                                                6
               35                                                                                                                                                                                                    60
                                                                                                                                                40
               30                                                                50                                                             35                                                                   50
               25                                                                                                                               30
                                                                                 40                                                                                                                                  40


Accuracy (%)                                                      Accuracy (%)                                                   Accuracy (%)                                                         Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                                25
               20
                                                                                 30                                                             20                                                                   30
               15
                                                                                 20                                                             15                                                                   20
                                              LLaDa 8B                                                       Dream 7B                                                             LLaDa 8B                                                       Dream 7B
               10                             EB, entropy                                                    EB, entropy                        10                                EB, entropy                                                    EB, entropy
                                              Top-k, entropy                     10                          Top-k, entropy                                                       Top-k, entropy                     10                          Top-k, entropy
               5                              EB, confidence                                                 EB, confidence                     5                                 EB, confidence                                                 EB, confidence
                                              Top-k, confidence                                              Top-k, confidence                                                    Top-k, confidence                                              Top-k, confidence
                                                                                 0                                                              0                                                                    0
                    0    20   40    60    80      100     120                         20    40    60    80     100     120                                 50        100         150       200                            25   50     75   100 125 150 175 200
                                    NFE                                                                NFE                                                                 NFE                                                             NFE
                                                   (a) HumanEval                                                                                                                            (b) MBPP

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     40
               70                                                                70                                                             30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     35
               60                                                                                                                               25
                                                                                 60                                                                                                                                  30



Accuracy (%)                                                      Accuracy (%)                                                   Accuracy (%)                                                         Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                                20                                                                   25
               50                                                                50
                                                                                                                                                15                                                                   20
               40                                                                40                                                                                                                                  15
                                              LLaDa 8B                                                       Dream 7B                           10                                LLaDa 8B                                                       Dream 7B
                                              EB, entropy                                                    EB, entropy                                                          EB, entropy                        10                          EB, entropy
               30                             Top-k, entropy                     30                          Top-k, entropy                     5                                 Top-k, entropy                                                 Top-k, entropy
                                              EB, confidence                                                 EB, confidence                                                       EB, confidence                     5                           EB, confidence
                                              Top-k, confidence                  20                          Top-k, confidence                  0                                 Top-k, confidence                  0                           Top-k, confidence
               20
                        20     40        60          80                                    20    40     60     80       100                          25   50    75   100 125 150 175 200                                  50        100    150     200       250
                                    NFE                                                                NFE                                                                 NFE                                                             NFE
                                                        (c) GSM8K                                                                                                                           (d) MATH

    Figure 5 pass@1 accuracy vs. NFE with generate_until logic on code and math reasoning tasks.

   Benchmarks. We use 4 widely used benchmarks. HumanEval (0 shot) (Chen et al., 2021) and MBPP (4 shot)
   (Austin et al., 2021b) code generation benchmarks; and GSM8K (8 shot) (Cobbe et al., 2021) and Math (4
   shot) (Hendrycks et al., 2021) math reasoning benchmarks. We note that we use different variants of GSM8K
   and Math in our evaluation compared to reported results for Dream 7B, hence the minor gaps in performance
   for standard Top-1 sampling.
    Setup. For each task, we follow common practice and set a maximal number of generated tokens, max_gen_len.
    Then, the prompt is padded to the right with mask tokens until the maximal sequence length of the model.
    During sampling, only masked tokens in the range of [len(prompt), len(prompt)+max_gen_len] are allowed to
    be unmasked. Generation stops once all tokens in the designated range have been unmasked. We show results for
    the two best performing error proxy functions entropy and confidence. Results with margin are in Appendix D.

    6.1.1                Measuring efficiency gains of MDM samplers

    In this part, we describe how we measure the gains obtained by our proposed sampler. We explain why
    current generation practices for MDMs require rethinking and propose to add a generate_until logic to
    save function evaluations. We then further observe that unlike ARMs that generate in a left-to-right order, a
    generate_until logic may still be suboptimal for MDM efficient generation.
    generate_until logic. Current generation practices for MDMs fix an apriori amount of tokens to be generated,
   i.e., max_gen_len, and generate until all tokens are unmasked. This is rather wasteful as typically producing
   a response to a given prompt will require less tokens than the full length, that is answer_len < max_gen_len.
   We therefore propose to incorporate a generate_until logic in MDM samplers similar to ARM generation
   practices. For example, for the MBPP benchmark, the few shot samples given as context to the model include
   a concluding phrase “[DONE]”. In ARM evaluation procedures, this phrase is used as a stopping criterion. For
   MDMs, however, due to the non left-to-right order of unmasking, we extend the generate_until logic to
   include an additional condition that all tokens in indices preceding the concluding phrase are unmasked.
    All experiments were run with the generate_until logic applied as a post-process in order to measure gains
    both against full max_gen_len and effective generation length to stopping criterion. The NFE reported
    in Figure 5 measures average number of function evaluations until a task specific generate_until logic is
    satisfied. EB-Sampler consistently improves upon accuracy-NFE Pareto frontier across all datasets and error
    proxies, gaining speed-ups of 2-4x compared to Top-1 sampler at the same accuracy. In Figures 9 and 10 we
    show the same plots against full max_gen_len NFE.


                                                                                                                                 7
Table 1 NFE and Speed-Ups for Dream 7B on the MBPP for various evaluation schemes at roughly same best pass@1.
For all configurations in the table the mean answer length is ∼ 50 tokens.

                                                                                                            generate_until logic +
                                   Full max_gen_len = 512   generate_until logic
                                                                                                            semi-AR (block_len=64)
                          pass@1   NFE       Speed-Up           NFE   Speed-Up             pass@1           NFE            Speed-Up
Top-1                     58.8%     512         x1          101.71      x1                   58.8%          64.59                x1
EB, entropy, γ = 0.001    59.2%    174.57      x 2.93        49.39     x 2.05                 59%           38.90               x 1.66
EB, entropy, γ = 0.1       58%     85.33       x 6.00        25.49     x 3.99                58.6%          21.19               x 3.05



Bias in function evaluation count. Surprisingly, under the generate_until post-process we still observed
high NFE counts at γ = 0 compared to expected answer lengths. This is most pronounced on the MBPP
benchmark, where the model finds it “easy” to repeat the instructions given to the model after the concluding
phrase although it did not finish unmasking all the masks before that. To get a better estimate of the actual
speed-up gains achieved by the EB-Sampler we take MBPP as a test case and adopt the semi-AR block
generation scheme from (Arriola et al., 2025; Nie et al., 2025b) to restrict the model from generating tokens
that are far from the context. In Table 1 we compare the average NFE at roughly the same performance for
the various strategies of controlling the generation length. We note that for this dataset and the sampling
strategies evaluated in the table the mean answer length is around 50 tokens, while the semi-AR block
generation requires 64.59 NFE, thus not fully resolving the bias. On the contrary, EB-Sampler requires 21.19
function evaluations to get the same performance with same average answer length, generating tokens at
a rate of 2.4 tokens per step. We therefore refrain from claiming a 6x speed up as it compares to a loose
generation procedure and believe a better estimate of the EB-Sampler’s gains is around 2-3x. Table 1 provides
three key insights on MDM efficiency evaluation. First, measuring the efficiency gains of samplers for MDMs
is non-trivial and depends on the generation configuration, second, MDMs invest computation on generating
tokens that are not used and this opens up an important practical question for the future use of MDMs, and
lastly, EB-Sampler shows strong performance in efficiency gains across all settings.

6.2     Logic puzzles
Discrete diffusion models have been shown to excel on logic puzzles such as maze navigation, Sudoku and
more (Nolte et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2024). We investigate whether these strong performances can be retained
while sampling more efficiently than one token at a time. Specifically, we train small scale discrete diffusion
models on Sudoku and Maze navigation problems and evaluate their performance on held-out data when
varying the sampling strategies.

6.2.1   Maze navigation

We use the maze generation methods for “DFS mazes” in (Nolte et al.,                              100
2024), see their Section 4.1. We generate 48K mazes for training and
2K for validation. All mazes are defined on a grid of size 10x10. They                             80


                                                                                   Accuracy (%)
are serialized into tokens by enumerating all the connections between                                                      Maze navigation
                                                                                                   60                          EB, entropy
cells in the grid, i.e. the edges in the graph defined by the maze. To aid                                                     Top-k, entropy
                                                                                                                               EB, confidence
learning the invariance with respect to edge reordering, the edges are                             40                          Top-k, confidence
shuffled before tokenization. A 6 million parameter discrete DiT model,                                                        EB, margin
                                                                                                                               Top-k, margin
using code adapted from (Lou et al., 2023), is trained to optimize the                             20
                                                                                                        0   5       10    15       20      25
masked diffusion objective, without explicit time dependence (Kitouni                                                    NFE
et al., 2024; Ou et al., 2025).                                                     Figure 6 10x10 mazes - accuracy vs
The metric used for performance comparison is the accuracy, defined as       average NFE.
the fraction of validation mazes fully solved. Figure 6 shows the accuracy as a function of average NFE over
the validation set for the different ordering metrics. All metrics perform extremely similarly, thus partially
obscured in the plot. All strategies work best in the single token unmasking regime. EB-Sampler preserves
most of the accuracy before experiencing a sharp drop-off at less than 5 NFEs. In contrast, the Top-k baselines
exhibit a steeper decline in performance, already at around 10 NFEs.



                                                            8
6.2.2   Sudoku

To further assess sampling strategies in structured logic problems, we                      100
evaluate performance on the task of Sudoku completion. Unlike maze                           80
navigation, which emphasizes path finding, Sudoku requires reasoning

                                                                             Accuracy (%)
over dense, globally constrained grids. This setting provides a com-                         60                 Sudoku solving
                                                                                                                 EB, entropy
plementary benchmark to test sampling strategies under those global                          40                  Top-k, entropy
                                                                                                                 EB, confidence
constraints.                                                                                                     Top-k, confidence
                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                 EB, margin
We adopt the standard 9×9 Sudoku setting and adapt the code from                              0
                                                                                                                 Top-k, margin
(Alp, 2024) to generate 48K training puzzles and 2K held-out puzzles                              0   20   40      60       80
with, all with unique solutions. Each puzzle is serialized into a sequence                                 NFE
of 89 tokens corresponding to the cell values and end-of-line tokens, with    Figure 7 Sudoku - accuracy vs aver-
zeros indicating blank cells. The discrete DiT model architecture used        age NFE.
for maze navigation is reused here.
We again show accuracy as a function of average NFE. The results are depicted in Figure 7. The trend is
similar to the trend in the maze navigation setup. EB-Sampler retains most of its performance for a longer
time than the Top-k samplers, and then drops off sharply. Notably, almost full performance is retained even
when averaging around 10-15 NFEs.


7    Related Work
Performant sampling for discrete diffusion. Procedures that improve sampling from MDMs are often focused on
improving performance for a given pre-trained model. Recent approaches consider planning (Kim et al., 2025),
deciding which masked tokens should be unmasked next, as well as remasking (Wang et al., 2025), deciding
which unmasked tokens should be masked again, related to predictor-corrector iterations (Gat et al., 2024;
Lezama et al., 2022) and forward-backwards sampling (Campbell et al., 2024), or consider both planning and
remasking in (Zheng et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2024). Like EB-Sampler, this research often
considers KL (equivalently ELBO) bounds. Unlike past research though, we focus on multi-token adaptive
planning with a variable-sized set of tokens to unmask, crucial for efficiency. While sampling for LLaDa (Nie
et al., 2025b) was described as remasking, it can be viewed as determining what to unmask first and then their
token values within semi-autoregressive blocks, a member of our ϕ family. Because we aim for efficient and
justified planning for scaled MDMs, we do not consider revisiting unmasked tokens here, enabling a simpler,
time-independent analysis with a KL bound that is minimized via adaptive sampling. Future research might
devise an efficient multi-token sampler that both unmasks and revisits past tokens upon EB-Sampler.
Efficient sampling for discrete diffusion. Efficiency has received relatively less attention than performance.
(Ren et al., 2025) proposed higher-order numerical solvers for discrete diffusion, not specific to MDMs. (Park
et al., 2024) introduced a method to avoid joint dependence error from parallel sampling, by performing a
global optimization for a non-adaptive sampling schedule (i.e. the number of tokens per step). EB-Sampler
determines this adaptively per sampling step. (Besnier et al., 2025) introduced an unmasking sampler
for MaskGIT (Chang et al., 2022) that controls joint dependence error via quasi-random, low-discrepancy
unmasking of an image, outperforming a confidence-based sampler in that domain. Finally, recent research
(Zhu et al., 2025) has proposed a distillation procedure for MDMs, and trained one-step image generators
from multi-step MaskGIT (Chang et al., 2022) and Messionic (Bai et al., 2024).
Speculative decoding. A prominent method to accelerate LLMs is speculative decoding, with 2-2.5x speedup
in (Chen et al., 2023). Instead of sampling from a large target language model, speculative decoding generates
a candidate sequence from a smaller draft language model and accepts some portion of that candidate utilizing
sequence probabilities. Modified rejection sampling guarantees the sequence is extended and this extension
is sampled from the target model. Because evaluating models with causal attention can be done cheaply
compared to sampling, efficiency gains occur when the draft model quickly samples reasonable sequences. This
procedure has also been adapted to any-order masked models (Uria et al., 2014; Hoogeboom et al., 2022) with
causal attention (Pannatier et al., 2024; Guo and Ermon, 2025). For MDMs with full attention, we cannot
directly apply speculative decoding because it is generally expensive to compute the sequence probability in a



                                                       9
full attention target model. (De Bortoli et al., 2025) has applied speculative sampling to continuous Gaussian
diffusion, but relies upon querying the target model in parallel. Speculative decoding has been combined with
discrete diffusion in (Christopher et al., 2024), where the draft is an MDM and the target is a language model.
Our EB-Sampler approach is complementary, and could be simply applied to speed up the draft model.


8   Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper we propose EB-Sampler, a theoretically grounded adaptive sampler for masked discrete diffusion
and flow models. This algorithm controls both which and how many tokens to sample using an interpretable
entropy bound and serves as a drop-in replacement for existing samplers. We evaluate our approach on math,
code and reasoning benchmarks with contemporary diffusion models of different scales, against the standard
samplers used by the authors of those models. We find that EB-Sampler significantly outperforms existing
samplers on the compute-vs-performance Pareto frontier and even yields 2-3x speed-ups without any loss of
performance.
Future research might consider learning a parameterized adaptive sampler from data, perhaps optimizing our
KL bound with respect to ϕ, or expand upon EB-Sampler to incorporate revisiting past unmasked tokens.
Such research could further advance efficient and performant sampling for masked diffusion models.




                                                      10
References
Ali Alp. Sudoku. https://github.com/alicommit-malp/sudoku/tree/main, 2024.
Marianne Arriola, Subham Sekhar Sahoo, Aaron Gokaslan, Zhihan Yang, Zhixuan Qi, Jiaqi Han, Justin T Chiu, and
 Volodymyr Kuleshov. Block diffusion: Interpolating between autoregressive and diffusion language models. In
 The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. https://openreview.net/forum?id=
 tyEyYT267x.
Jacob Austin, Daniel D Johnson, Jonathan Ho, Daniel Tarlow, and Rianne Van Den Berg. Structured denoising
  diffusion models in discrete state-spaces. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:17981–17993, 2021a.
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang, Carrie
  Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732,
  2021b.
Jinbin Bai, Tian Ye, Wei Chow, Enxin Song, Qing-Guo Chen, Xiangtai Li, Zhen Dong, Lei Zhu, and Shuicheng Yan.
   Meissonic: Revitalizing masked generative transformers for efficient high-resolution text-to-image synthesis. In The
  Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Victor Besnier, Mickael Chen, David Hurych, Eduardo Valle, and Matthieu Cord. Halton scheduler for masked
  generative image transformer, 2025. https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.17076.
Andrew Campbell, Jason Yim, Regina Barzilay, Tom Rainforth, and Tommi Jaakkola. Generative flows on discrete
  state-spaces: Enabling multimodal flows with applications to protein co-design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04997,
  2024.
Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Lu Jiang, Ce Liu, and William T Freeman. Maskgit: Masked generative image transformer.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 11315–11325, 2022.
Charlie Chen, Sebastian Borgeaud, Geoffrey Irving, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Laurent Sifre, and John Jumper. Accelerating
  large language model decoding with speculative sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01318, 2023.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri
 Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large language models trained on code.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
Jacob K Christopher, Brian R Bartoldson, Tal Ben-Nun, Michael Cardei, Bhavya Kailkhura, and Ferdinando Fioretto.
  Speculative diffusion decoding: Accelerating language generation through diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.05636,
  2024.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert,
  Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Valentin De Bortoli, Alexandre Galashov, Arthur Gretton, and Arnaud Doucet. Accelerated diffusion models via
  speculative sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.05370, 2025.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
  transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 conference of the North American chapter of
  the association for computational linguistics: human language technologies, volume 1 (long and short papers), pages
  4171–4186, 2019.
Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Saini, Yam Levi, Dominik
  Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, Dustin Podell, Tim Dockhorn, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Alex Goodwin,
  Yannik Marek, and Robin Rombach. Scaling rectified flow transformers for high-resolution image synthesis, 2024.
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.03206.
Itai Gat, Tal Remez, Neta Shaul, Felix Kreuk, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Gabriel Synnaeve, Yossi Adi, and Yaron Lipman.
   Discrete flow matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15595, 2024.
Gabe Guo and Stefano Ermon. Reviving any-subset autoregressive models with principled parallel sampling and
  speculative decoding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.20456, 2025.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song, and Jacob
  Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.03874, 2021.




                                                          11
Emiel Hoogeboom, Alexey A. Gritsenko, Jasmijn Bastings, Ben Poole, Rianne van den Berg, and Tim Sal-
 imans. Autoregressive diffusion models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=Lm8T39vLDTE.
Jaeyeon Kim, Kulin Shah, Vasilis Kontonis, Sham Kakade, and Sitan Chen. Train for the worst, plan for the best:
  Understanding token ordering in masked diffusions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06768, 2025.
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. An introduction to variational autoencoders. CoRR, abs/1906.02691, 2019.
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.02691.
Ouail Kitouni, Niklas Nolte, James Hensman, and Bhaskar Mitra. Disk: A diffusion model for structured knowledge,
  2024. https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.05253.
Jose Lezama, Tim Salimans, Lu Jiang, Huiwen Chang, Jonathan Ho, and Irfan Essa. Discrete predictor-corrector
  diffusion models for image synthesis. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Sulin Liu, Juno Nam, Andrew Campbell, Hannes Stärk, Yilun Xu, Tommi Jaakkola, and Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli.
  Think while you generate: Discrete diffusion with planned denoising. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06264, 2024.
Aaron Lou, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Discrete diffusion modeling by estimating the ratios of the data
  distribution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16834, 2023.
Shen Nie, Fengqi Zhu, Chao Du, Tianyu Pang, Qian Liu, Guangtao Zeng, Min Lin, and Chongxuan Li. Scaling up
  masked diffusion models on text. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025a.
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=WNvvwK0tut.
Shen Nie, Fengqi Zhu, Zebin You, Xiaolu Zhang, Jingyang Ou, Jun Hu, Jun Zhou, Yankai Lin, Ji-Rong Wen, and
  Chongxuan Li. Large language diffusion models, 2025b. https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.09992.
Niklas Nolte, Ouail Kitouni, Adina Williams, Mike Rabbat, and Mark Ibrahim. Transformers can navigate mazes with
  multi-step prediction, 2024. https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.05117.
Jingyang Ou, Shen Nie, Kaiwen Xue, Fengqi Zhu, Jiacheng Sun, Zhenguo Li, and Chongxuan Li. Your absorbing discrete
   diffusion secretly models the conditional distributions of clean data, 2025. https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.03736.
Arnaud Pannatier, Evann Courdier, and François Fleuret. σ-gpts: A new approach to autoregressive models. In Joint
  European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pages 143–159. Springer, 2024.
Yong-Hyun Park, Chieh-Hsin Lai, Satoshi Hayakawa, Yuhta Takida, and Yuki Mitsufuji. : Optimizing sampling
  schedule of discrete diffusion models. CoRR, 2024.
Fred Zhangzhi Peng, Zachary Bezemek, Sawan Patel, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Sherwood Yao, Alexander Tong, and
  Pranam Chatterjee. Path planning for masked diffusion model sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.03540, 2025.
Adam Polyak, Amit Zohar, Andrew Brown, Andros Tjandra, Animesh Sinha, Ann Lee, Apoorv Vyas, Bowen Shi,
  Chih-Yao Ma, Ching-Yao Chuang, David Yan, Dhruv Choudhary, Dingkang Wang, Geet Sethi, Guan Pang, Haoyu
  Ma, Ishan Misra, Ji Hou, Jialiang Wang, Kiran Jagadeesh, Kunpeng Li, Luxin Zhang, Mannat Singh, Mary
  Williamson, Matt Le, Matthew Yu, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Peizhao Zhang, Peter Vajda, Quentin Duval, Rohit
  Girdhar, Roshan Sumbaly, Sai Saketh Rambhatla, Sam Tsai, Samaneh Azadi, Samyak Datta, Sanyuan Chen, Sean
  Bell, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shelly Sheynin, Siddharth Bhattacharya, Simran Motwani, Tao Xu, Tianhe Li, Tingbo
  Hou, Wei-Ning Hsu, Xi Yin, Xiaoliang Dai, Yaniv Taigman, Yaqiao Luo, Yen-Cheng Liu, Yi-Chiao Wu, Yue Zhao,
  Yuval Kirstain, Zecheng He, Zijian He, Albert Pumarola, Ali Thabet, Artsiom Sanakoyeu, Arun Mallya, Baishan
  Guo, Boris Araya, Breena Kerr, Carleigh Wood, Ce Liu, Cen Peng, Dimitry Vengertsev, Edgar Schonfeld, Elliot
  Blanchard, Felix Juefei-Xu, Fraylie Nord, Jeff Liang, John Hoffman, Jonas Kohler, Kaolin Fire, Karthik Sivakumar,
  Lawrence Chen, Licheng Yu, Luya Gao, Markos Georgopoulos, Rashel Moritz, Sara K. Sampson, Shikai Li, Simone
  Parmeggiani, Steve Fine, Tara Fowler, Vladan Petrovic, and Yuming Du. Movie gen: A cast of media foundation
  models, 2024. https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.13720.
Yinuo Ren, Haoxuan Chen, Yuchen Zhu, Wei Guo, Yongxin Chen, Grant M Rotskoff, Molei Tao, and Lexing Ying.
  Fast solvers for discrete diffusion models: Theory and applications of high-order algorithms. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2502.00234, 2025.
Subham Sekhar Sahoo, Marianne Arriola, Aaron Gokaslan, Edgar Mariano Marroquin, Alexander M Rush, Yair
  Schiff, Justin T Chiu, and Volodymyr Kuleshov. Simple and effective masked diffusion language models. In The
  Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024. https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=L4uaAR4ArM.



                                                        12
Benigno Uria, Iain Murray, and Hugo Larochelle. A deep and tractable density estimator. In Eric P. Xing and Tony
  Jebara, editors, Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 32 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pages 467–475, Bejing, China, 22–24 Jun 2014. PMLR.
Guanghan Wang, Yair Schiff, Subham Sekhar Sahoo, and Volodymyr Kuleshov. Remasking discrete diffusion models
 with inference-time scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.00307, 2025.
Jiacheng Ye, Jiahui Gao, Shansan Gong, Lin Zheng, Xin Jiang, Zhenguo Li, and Lingpeng Kong. Beyond autoregression:
   Discrete diffusion for complex reasoning and planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.14157, 2024.
Jiacheng Ye, Zhihui Xie, Lin Zheng, Jiahui Gao, Zirui Wu, Xin Jiang, Zhenguo Li, and Lingpeng Kong. Dream 7b,
  2025. https://hkunlp.github.io/blog/2025/dream.
Kaiwen Zheng, Yongxin Chen, Hanzi Mao, Ming-Yu Liu, Jun Zhu, and Qinsheng Zhang. Masked diffusion models are
  secretly time-agnostic masked models and exploit inaccurate categorical sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02908,
  2024.
Lin Zheng, Jianbo Yuan, Lei Yu, and Lingpeng Kong. A reparameterized discrete diffusion model for text generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05737, 2023.
Yuanzhi Zhu, Xi Wang, Stéphane Lathuilière, and Vicky Kalogeiton. Di[M]o: Distilling masked diffusion models into
  one-step generator. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.15457, 2025.




                                                        13
Appendix
A     Theorems and proofs

A.1     KL divergence error decomposition
We
P revisit the KL divergence introduced in Section 5. Recall we quantify the error from sampling pϕ (x) =
 z pϕ (x, z) instead of q(x) via KL divergence



                                                                         d
                                                                                         "                                        #
                                                                         X                                X
             DKL (q(x), pϕ (x)) ≤ DKL (qϕ (x, z), pϕ (x, z)) =                 Eqϕ ln q(xzi |xz<i ) −             ln pθ (xl |xz<i ) ,   (10)
                                                                         i=1                              l∈z i


where the inequality can be derived from the Evidence Lower BOund (ELBO) (Kingma and Welling, 2019).
In the equality we plug in the definitions of the joint distributions pϕ (x, z), qϕ (x, z) from Equation (5) and
Equation (6) respectively, where the ϕ term cancels out, and the sum and expectation can be interchanged
since the sum does not
                        Q                       
                            d
We add and subtract ln                    l z<i
                                                ) from Equation (10):
                                Q
                            i=1  l∈z i q(x |x



      d
                "                                          #
      X                              X
            Eqϕ ln q(xzi |xz<i ) −           ln pθ (xl |xz<i ) =
      i=1                            l∈z i
                                                                   d
                                                                               "                                             #
                                                                   X               X          q(xl |xz<i )   q(xzi |xz<i )
                                                               =         Eqϕ               ln θ l z<i + ln Q         l z<i )
                                                                                                                               ,        (11)
                                                                   i=1                   i
                                                                                             p (x |x )      l∈z i q(x |x
                                                                                   l∈z


and will now separately simplify the two terms.
Joint dependence error. We begin with the right term of the expectation in last equality of Equation (11),
which will turn out to be the joint dependence error term in Equation (7).


                                    q(xzi |xz<i )
                                                      
                       Eqϕ ln Q               l z<i )
                                                          =
                                   l∈z i q(x |x
                                                         q(xzi |xz<i )
                              X                                              
                          =         qϕ (x, z) ln     Q               l z<i )
                                                                                 =
                              x,z                       l∈z i q(x |x

                                                                         q(xzi |xz<i )
                                                                                         
                          (∗)    X
                                                      z≤i
                           =               qϕ (z≤i , x ) ln          Q           l z<i )
                                                                                             =
                                      z
                               z≤i ,x ≤i                                l∈z i q(x |x

                                                                                                 q(xzi |xz<i )
                                X                          X                                                    
                          =               qϕ (z≤i , xz<i )         qϕ (xzi |xz<i , z≤i ) ln Q            l z<i )
                                                                                                                   =
                                     z <i                   x zi                                l∈z i q(x |x
                              z≤i ,x
                                                  "                                                #
                          (∗∗)                       X
                                                               z      z           q(xzi |xz<i )
                           = Eqϕ (z≤i ,xz<i )             q(x |x ) ln Q
                                                                 i      <i
                                                                                           l z<i )
                                                                                                      =
                                                     xzi                         l∈z i q(x |x
                                                "                                               !#
                                                                               Y
                          = Eqϕ (z≤i ,xz<i ) DKL q(x i |x <i ),    z     z              l  z
                                                                                   q(x |x <i ))      .                                  (12)
                                                                           l∈z i


where in (∗) we marginalize over xz>i and z>i since the function the expectation is taken over does not depend
on them. In (∗∗) we use the fact that for the sampling procedure defined by ϕ, qϕ (xzi |xz<i ,z≤i ) = q(xzi |xz<i ).


                                                                     14
At last, we arrive at an expectation of the KL-divergence between the joint and the factorized product
distributions of xzi conditioned on all the unmasked tokens before, measuring the joint dependence withoun
the subset of indices zi .
Model error. As for the left term in the last equality of Equation (11), it will turn out to be the model error
term in Equation (7). Recalling the left term:

                         "                           #
                             X          q(xl |xz<i )
                   Eqϕ               ln θ l z<i =
                                   i
                                       p (x |x )
                             l∈z
                                                                                !
                               X                    X          q(xl |xz<i )
                         =           qϕ (x, z)              ln θ l z<i              =
                               x,z                        i
                                                              p (x |x )
                                                    l∈z
                                                                                              !
                         (∗)        X                             X          q(xl |xz<i )
                         =                    qϕ (z≤i , xz≤i )            ln θ l z<i              =
                                        z≤i                             i
                                                                            p (x |x )
                               z≤i ,x                             l∈z
                                                                                                                           !
                                   X
                                                          z<i
                                                                X
                                                                           zi    z<i           q(xl |xz<i )
                                                                                                  X
                         =            qϕ (z≤i , x )          qϕ (x |x , z≤i )              ln θ l z<i                          =
                                                       xzi
                                                                                              p (x |x )
                            z≤i ,xz<i                                                l∈z i
                                              "                                              #
                         (∗∗)                   XX                            q(xl |xz<i )
                          = Eqϕ (z≤i ,xz<i )                q(xzi |xz<i ) ln θ l z<i =
                                                                             p (x |x )
                                                l∈z i xzi
                                                "                                            #
                                                                                 l z<i
                         (∗∗∗)                    XX                         q(x  |x       )
                           = Eqϕ (z≤i ,xz<i )                q(xl |xz<i ) ln θ l z<i =
                                                     i    l
                                                                             p (x |x )
                                                  l∈z x
                                            "                                             #
                                              X
                         = Eqϕ (z≤i ,xz<i )                     l  z       θ   l  z
                                                    DKL (q(x |x <i ), p (x |x <i )) .                                              (13)
                                                      l∈z i


where (∗) and (∗∗) are the same steps as in the joint dependence error derivation above. In (∗ ∗ ∗), we
again marginalize over variable that do not appear in the expectation. At last, we arrive at a sum of of the
KL-divergences between the factorized conditionals, which is exactly what pθ is trained to learn, and this we
call this term model error.

KL divergence equality: The two KL divergences, DKL (q(x), pϕ (x)) and DKL (qϕ (x, z), pϕ (x, z)), are equal
when qϕ (z|x) = pϕ (z|x). This only occurs under special ϕ. For any ϕ,
                                                                 Qd         i z<i                   d
                                        qϕ (x, z)   q(x)             i=1 ϕ(z |x   , z <i )          Y
                    qϕ (z|x) =                    =                                             =         ϕ(z i |xz<i , z <i ).    (14)
                                          q(x)                           q(x)                       i=1

Then
                                                      pϕ (x, z)
                                     pϕ (z|x) =
                                                       pϕ (x)
                                                      Qd                 θ l z<i
                                                                                         
                                                                                             ϕ(z i |xz<i , z <i )
                                                              Q
                                                          i=1     l∈z i p (x |x  )
                                                  =
                                                                                pϕ (x)
                                                      Qd         Q         θl z<i
                                                                                         
                                                                  l∈z i p (x |x   )
                                                  =       i=1
                                                                                             qϕ (z|x).                             (15)
                                                                     pϕ (x)

Thus pϕ (z|x) is almost certainly not equal to qϕ (z|x) even if we unmask one token sequentially, because pθ
is learned. The product of the learned conditionals almost certainly results in a different joint distribution
depending on the order, unlike for the data distribution where the product of the true conditionals is q(x) for
every order.


                                                                          15
However, when every ϕ is deterministic we do have equality. This special case is relevant because many
schemes introduced in the main text are deterministic, or nearly so. Then the partition z is entirely determined
by x and can be written zϕ (x), and qϕ (z|x) = pϕ (z|x) are a point mass on zϕ (x). For a deterministic ϕ
optimizing the KL divergence hence directly optimizes the likelihood Eq [ln pϕ (x)], and not a lower-bound on
that likelihood, because Eq [ln pϕ (x)] = Eqϕ [ln pϕ (x, zϕ (x))] when z is deterministically generated.


B       Algorithm

Algorithm 1 EB-Sampler with generate_until logic
Require: Factorized conditionals predictions pθ,l (·|x), threshold γ ≥ 0, prompt y0 , sequence length d, error
    proxy functional E, entropy functional H, stopping criteria C : S → {True, False}, mask token m
    n = d − len(y0 )
    x ← [y0 , m ∗ n]                                                                    ▷ Set initial condition
    Im = {l|xl = m}
    while Im ̸= ∅ and not C(x) do                                              ▷ Stop if all tokens unmasked
       p̂l = pθ,l (·|x), for l ∈ Im
       ê = E(p̂)
       ĥ = H(p̂)
       Isort = argsort(êIm )                                                  ▷ Sort masked tokens by error
       U ← {}                                                                         ▷ Initialize subpartition
       for a in Isort do                                                 ▷ Iterate over sorted masked tokens
            U ←U ∪a
            if sum(ĥU ) − max(ĥU ) ≤ γ then                          ▷ Compute entropy bound equation 2
                xa = sample(p̂a )                ▷ Sample unmasked value from posterior if below threshold
           else
               break                                  ▷ Halt unmasking for loop if entropy bound is exceeded
                 l
        Im = {l|x = m}
    return x



C       Experimental details

C.1     Code and math reasoning
C.1.1    Datasets

For code generation tasks we evaluate EB-Sampler on 0-shot HumanEval Chen et al. (2021), 4-shot MBPP
Austin et al. (2021b), and for math reasoning we test 8-shot GSM8K Cobbe et al. (2021) without Chain Of
Thought (COT) variant, and 4-shot Math Hendrycks et al. (2021) corresponding to the hendrycks_math
variant.

C.1.2    Setup

We evaluate the efficiency gains of EB-Sampler on two recent state of the art MDMs: LLaDa 8B Nie et al.
(2025b) and Dream 7B Ye et al. (2025). For LLaDa 8B the maximal sequence length is 4096 and for Dream
7B, 2048. That is, the input to the models in the beginning of generation, is a padded sequence, starting with
the prompt given in each task and then padded with the mask token, m, to the maximal sequence length,
denoted max_seq_len. For each dataset a predetermined generation length is set, denoted max_gen_len. We
enforce unmasking tokens that are in the range [len(prompt), len(prompt) + max_gen_len]. In the rare case
when len(prompt) + max_gen_len > max_seq_len the prompt is truncated from the left.




                                                       16
                                     len(prompt)           max_gen_len

                                       prompt                answer          mask padding

                                                         max_seq_len



Figure 8 Input sequence visualization.

Table 2 Evaluation parameters for code and math reasoning.



                                                                             generate_until phrase
                    Dataset size   #-shots   max_gen_len
                                                                         LLaDa 8B               Dream 7B
        HumanEval       164          0             512        [”<|endoftext|>”,”\n\n\n”] [”<|endoftext|>”, ”“ ‘\n”]
        MBPP            500          4             512                             ”[DONE]”
        GSM8K           1320         8             256                        ”The answer is %d.”
        MATH            5000         4             512                       ”I hope it is correct.”


All benchmarks were run in the same computational setting, on 8×H100. We report runtimes for confidence
and entropy error proxies in Table 3. Runtimes with margin error proxy are longer due to the need to sort
over the vocabulary size to compute the top-2 tokens. Runtimes for LLaDa 8B are longer than Dream 7B due
to having twice the maximal sequence length of Dream.

Table 3 Average runtimes on 8×H100 of code and math benchmarks evaluation for 1 token per step sampling (Top1 )
with entropy and confidence error proxies. Relative standard deviation of measurements is 1%.


                                                           Runtimes (hrs.)
                                                         LLaDa 8B Dream 7B
                                         HumanEval          0.58           0.26
                                         MBPP               1.75           0.79
                                         GSM8K              2.29           1.03
                                         MATH              17.30           7.84


C.1.3    Post-process

Accuracy evaluation. Model outputs for all datasets evaluated with both LLaDa 8B and Dream 7B had
been directly fed into the standard evaluation scripts, except for HumanEval with Dream 7B. Evaluating
the raw output of Dream 7B on the HumanEval benchmark results in around 8% drop in performance
compared to reported results by the authors. Investigating the cause for the drop in performance led to the
observation that Dream 7B sometimes produces answers with a template that places the generated code inside
code blocks which get ignored when compiled and are therefore considered as failure at the task. We thus
post-process Dream’s raw outputs on HumanEval to extract the function implementation, closing the gap to
reported results to < 2%. Importantly, we emphasize that all comparisons in our paper are between sampling
procedures from the same model and same evaluation.

Efficiency measurement. As noted in Section 6.1.1, standard sampling procedures from MDM generate a
sequence with predetermined length, max_gen_len. In most cases, the answer to the given prompt will be
shorter, denoted answer_len, and there are (max_gen_len − answer_len) generated tokens that are being
truncated, hence unused, during evaluation. To isolate the efficiency gain EB-Sampler provides in generating
the answer tokens from the gain in generating the rest of the tokens that are later not used, we incorporate
the generate_until logic as a post-process. We note that this logic can also be integrated in the sampling
procedure itself, saving up computation, without changing the performance of the model, as the logic ensures
termination of generation only once the stopping criterion has been met. The phrases used as markers for the
generate_until post-process logic for each dataset and each model are listed in Table 2.


                                                             17
    D                Additional experiments - code and math reasoning
               35                                                                                                                                                                                   60
                                                                                                                                         40
               30                                                            50                                                          35                                                         50
               25                                                                                                                        30
                                                                             40                                                                                                                     40


Accuracy (%)                                                  Accuracy (%)                                                Accuracy (%)                                               Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                         25
               20
                                                                             30                                                          20                                                         30
                                          LLaDa 8B                                                   Dream 7B                                                    LLaDa 8B                                                   Dream 7B
               15                         EB, entropy                                                EB, entropy                                                 EB, entropy                                                EB, entropy
                                                                             20                                                          15                                                         20
                                          Top-k, entropy                                             Top-k, entropy                                              Top-k, entropy                                             Top-k, entropy
               10                         EB, confidence                                             EB, confidence                      10                      EB, confidence                                             EB, confidence
                                          Top-k, confidence                  10                      Top-k, confidence                                           Top-k, confidence                  10                      Top-k, confidence
               5                          Top-k, margin                                              Top-k, margin                       5                       Top-k, margin                                              Top-k, margin
                                          Top-k, margin                                              Top-k, margin                                               Top-k, margin                                              Top-k, margin
                                                                             0                                                           0                                                          0
                      100    200    300       400      500                        100   200    300       400      500                         100   200    300       400      500                        100   200    300       400      500
                                   NFE                                                        NFE                                                         NFE                                                        NFE
                                               (a) HumanEval                                                                                                               (b) MBPP

    Figure 9 pass@1 accuracy vs. full max_gen_len NFE on code reasoning tasks.



                                                                                                                                                                                                    40
               70                                                            70                                                          30
                                                                                                                                                                                                    35
               60                                                                                                                        25
                                                                             60                                                                                                                     30



Accuracy (%)                                                  Accuracy (%)                                                Accuracy (%)                                               Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                         20                                                         25
               50                                                            50
                                          LLaDa 8B                                                   Dream 7B                            15                      LLaDa 8B                           20                      Dream 7B
               40                         EB, entropy                        40                      EB, entropy                                                 EB, entropy                        15                      EB, entropy
                                          Top-k, entropy                                             Top-k, entropy                      10                      Top-k, entropy                                             Top-k, entropy
                                          EB, confidence                                             EB, confidence                                              EB, confidence                     10                      EB, confidence
               30                         Top-k, confidence                  30                      Top-k, confidence                   5                       Top-k, confidence                                          Top-k, confidence
                                          Top-k, margin                                              Top-k, margin                                               Top-k, margin                      5                       Top-k, margin
                                          Top-k, margin                      20                      Top-k, margin                       0                       Top-k, margin                      0                       Top-k, margin
               20
                      50    100     150       200      250                        50    100    150       200      250                         100   200    300       400      500                        100   200    300       400      500
                                   NFE                                                        NFE                                                         NFE                                                        NFE
                                                    (a) GSM8K                                                                                                              (b) MATH

    Figure 10 pass@1 accuracy vs. full max_gen_len NFE on math reasoning tasks.



    D.1               Results with margin error proxy
    In Figure 11 we show the results with the margin error proxy along with the results with confidence and
    entropy error proxies presented in the main body of the paper in Figure 5. We observed that confidence error
    proxy was typically the best for the LLaDa 8B model and entropy error proxy worked best in most cases for
    Dream 7B. The margin error proxy mostly yielded inferior accuracy in full NFE, thus to maintain readability
    of the plots we did not include it in the main body of the paper.

    D.2                Measuring efficiency of MDMs
    In Section 6.1.1 we outline the different ways to measure sampling efficiency and discuss the problems with
    some of the approaches. We explain why measuring efficiency against full sequence length generation results
    in apparent high gains (like in Figures 9 and 10), and then propose two ways to better approximate the gains
    provided by different samplers:
                    • Unmask with generate_until logic
                    • Unmask semi-auto-regressively with generate_until logic

    Effective tokens/step with generate_until logic. In Figure 12 we show accuracy against the effective
    generation speed of the model quantified via:
                                                                                                                            mean_answer_len
                                                                             Effective Tokens/Step =                                           ,                                                                                       (16)
                                                                                                                         mean_NFE_to_condition

    where mean_answer_len is the average number of tokens from left to right until the generate_until answer
    markers, and mean_NFE_to_condition is the number of function evaluations required by the model to generate


                                                                                                                         18
               35                                                                                                                                                                                                         60
                                                                                                                                                           40
               30                                                                     50                                                                   35                                                             50
               25                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                                      40                                                                                                                                  40


Accuracy (%)                                                           Accuracy (%)                                                         Accuracy (%)                                                   Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                                           25
               20
                                                                                      30                                                                   20                                                             30
                                                   LLaDa 8B                                                           Dream 7B                                                       LLaDa 8B                                                                       Dream 7B
               15                                  EB, entropy                                                        EB, entropy                                                    EB, entropy                                                                    EB, entropy
                                                                                      20                                                                   15                                                             20
                                                   Top-k, entropy                                                     Top-k, entropy                                                 Top-k, entropy                                                                 Top-k, entropy
               10                                  EB, confidence                                                     EB, confidence                       10                        EB, confidence                                                                 EB, confidence
                                                   Top-k, confidence                  10                              Top-k, confidence                                              Top-k, confidence                    10                                        Top-k, confidence
               5                                   Top-k, margin                                                      Top-k, margin                        5                         Top-k, margin                                                                  Top-k, margin
                                                   Top-k, margin                                                      Top-k, margin                                                  Top-k, margin                                                                  Top-k, margin
                                                                                      0                                                                    0                                                              0
                    0        50        100        150     200                              25        50    75   100   125     150    175                        50   100 150 200 250 300 350                                   0         50     100         150     200      250     300
                                         NFE                                                                    NFE                                                          NFE                                                                        NFE
                                                         (a) HumanEval                                                                                                                          (b) MBPP

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          40
               70                                                                     70                                                                   30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          35
               60                                                                                                                                          25
                                                                                      60                                                                                                                                  30



Accuracy (%)                                                           Accuracy (%)                                                         Accuracy (%)                                                   Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                                           20                                                             25
               50                                                                     50
                                                   LLaDa 8B                                                           Dream 7B                             15                        LLaDa 8B                             20                                        Dream 7B
               40                                  EB, entropy                        40                              EB, entropy                                                    EB, entropy                          15                                        EB, entropy
                                                   Top-k, entropy                                                     Top-k, entropy                       10                        Top-k, entropy                                                                 Top-k, entropy
                                                   EB, confidence                                                     EB, confidence                                                 EB, confidence                       10                                        EB, confidence
               30                                  Top-k, confidence                  30                              Top-k, confidence                    5                         Top-k, confidence                                                              Top-k, confidence
                                                   Top-k, margin                                                      Top-k, margin                                                  Top-k, margin                        5                                         Top-k, margin
                                                   Top-k, margin                      20                              Top-k, margin                        0                         Top-k, margin                        0                                         Top-k, margin
               20
                        20        40         60     80       100                                20    40   60    80   100 120 140                               50     100     150        200        250                            50        100     150     200      250     300
                                         NFE                                                                    NFE                                                          NFE                                                                        NFE
                                                            (c) GSM8K                                                                                                                           (d) MATH

    Figure 11 pass@1 accuracy vs. NFE with generate_until logic on code and math reasoning tasks.



    the answer until both generate_until answer markers apear in answer and all tokens before the marker are
    unmasked. Figure 12 shows that in most cases the effective speed at γ = 0 or Top1 , is actually less than
    1, meaning that the model unmasks tokens that are not used in the final answer, or equivalently unmasks
    tokens that come after the stopping phrase in the sequence. This observation led us to explore an approach to
    mitigates this inefficiency via semi-autoregressive generation (Arriola et al., 2025; Nie et al., 2025b).

    Semi-autoregressive generation. Figure 12 supports our claim that mostly in the MBPP benchmark many
    tokens are generated after the stopping phrase although not all tokens have been unmasked before. In the
    main body of the paper, in Table 1, we showed an ablation with semi-autoregressive generation for that
    benchmark with the Dream 7B model. In Table 4 we also add the same ablation with the LLaDa 8B model.
    We report the same ablation for the GSM8K benchmark in Tables 5 and 6, which show that the gap in
    efficiency between with and without semi-autoregressive generation is small to non existing aligning with
    Figure 12 that shows effective token/step of around 1 on this benchmark. That is, on GSM8K it is less likely
    that the model generates tokens that come after the stopping phrase.

    Table 4 NFE and Speed-Ups for LLaDa 8B on the MBPP for various evaluation schemes at roughly same best pass@1.
    For all configurations in the table the mean answer length is ∼ 60 tokens.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   generate_until logic +
                                                                                                     Full max_gen_len = 512                       generate_until logic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   semi-AR (block_len=64)
                                                                       pass@1                        NFE              Speed-Up                        NFE             Speed-Up                   pass@1                            NFE                       Speed-Up
    Top-1                                                              39.6%                          512               x1                        224.93                 x1                       39.4%                            73.31                           x1
    EB, confidence, γ = 0.001                                          39.8%                         347.28            x 1.47                     155.31                x 1.44                    39.4%                            60.83                          x 1.21
    EB, confidence, γ = 0.1                                            39.2%                         138.41            x 3.67                      64.01                x 3.51                    38.8%                            33.20                          x 2.21




                                                                                                                                           19
               35                                                                                                                                                                                      60
                                                                                                                                           40
               30                                                          50                                                              35                                                          50
               25                                                                                                                          30
                                                                           40                                                                                                                          40


Accuracy (%)                                                Accuracy (%)                                                    Accuracy (%)                                                Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                           25
               20
                                                                           30                                                              20                                                          30
                          LLaDa 8B                                                    Dream 7B                                                        LLaDa 8B                                                      Dream 7B
               15         EB, entropy                                                 EB, entropy                                                     EB, entropy                                                   EB, entropy
                                                                           20                                                              15                                                          20
                          Top-k, entropy                                              Top-k, entropy                                                  Top-k, entropy                                                Top-k, entropy
               10         EB, confidence                                              EB, confidence                                       10         EB, confidence                                                EB, confidence
                          Top-k, confidence                                10         Top-k, confidence                                               Top-k, confidence                                10           Top-k, confidence
               5          Top-k, margin                                               Top-k, margin                                        5          Top-k, margin                                                 Top-k, margin
                          Top-k, margin                                               Top-k, margin                                                   Top-k, margin                                                 Top-k, margin
                                                                           0                                                               0                                                           0
                               100                                               100                               101                                        100                 101                                       100                 101
                            Effective Tokens/Step                                       Effective Tokens/Step                                           Effective Tokens/Step                                         Effective Tokens/Step
                                               (a) HumanEval                                                                                                                      (b) MBPP

                                                                                                                                                                                                       40
               70                                                          70                                                              30
                                                                                                                                                                                                       35
               60                                                                                                                          25
                                                                           60                                                                                                                          30



Accuracy (%)                                                Accuracy (%)                                                    Accuracy (%)                                                Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                           20                                                          25
               50                                                          50
                          LLaDa 8B                                                    Dream 7B                                             15         LLaDa 8B                                         20           Dream 7B
               40         EB, entropy                                      40         EB, entropy                                                     EB, entropy                                      15           EB, entropy
                          Top-k, entropy                                              Top-k, entropy                                       10         Top-k, entropy                                                Top-k, entropy
                          EB, confidence                                              EB, confidence                                                  EB, confidence                                   10           EB, confidence
               30         Top-k, confidence                                30         Top-k, confidence                                    5          Top-k, confidence                                             Top-k, confidence
                          Top-k, margin                                               Top-k, margin                                                   Top-k, margin                                    5            Top-k, margin
                          Top-k, margin                                    20         Top-k, margin                                        0          Top-k, margin                                    0            Top-k, margin
               20
                    100                               101                       100                                101                          100                             101                            100                            101
                            Effective Tokens/Step                                       Effective Tokens/Step                                           Effective Tokens/Step                                         Effective Tokens/Step
                                                    (c) GSM8K                                                                                                                    (d) MATH

    Figure 12 pass@1 accuracy vs. tokens/step on code and math reasoning tasks.


    Table 5 NFE and Speed-Ups for Dream 7B on the GSM8K for various evaluation schemes at roughly same best pass@1.
    For all configurations in the table the mean answer length is ∼ 93 tokens.

                                                                                                                                                                                                        generate_until logic +
                                                                                Full max_gen_len                         generate_until logic
                                                                                                                                                                                                        semi-AR (block_len=64)
                                                      pass@1                     NFE               Speed-Up              NFE                    Speed-Up                        pass@1                  NFE                       Speed-Up
    Top-1                                             74.30%                     256                       x1            97.44                         x1                       74.90%                  95.23                       x1
    EB, entropy, γ = 0.01                             74.37%                    156.29                    x 1.64         49.60                        x 1.96                    75.36%                  48.29                      x 1.97
    EB, entropy, γ = 0.1                              74.83%                    129.27                    x 1.98         35.94                        x 2.71                    75.36%                  35.60                      x 2.66



    Table 6 NFE and Speed-Ups for LLaDa 8B on the GSM8K for various evaluation schemes at roughly same best pass@1.
    For all configurations in the table the mean answer length is ∼ 93 tokens.

                                                                                                                                                                                                            generate_until logic +
                                                                                       Full max_gen_len                   generate_until logic
                                                                                                                                                                                                            semi-AR (block_len=64)
                                                            pass@1                     NFE                Speed-Up        NFE                         Speed-Up                   pass@1                     NFE                   Speed-Up
    Top-1                                                   71.79%                     256                  x1            95.19                         x1                       71.95%                     93.62                    x1
    EB, confidence, γ = 0.01                                71.64%                    185.78               x 1.36         66.57                        x 1.43                    72.33%                     65.42                   x 1.43
    EB, confidence, γ = 0.1                                 72.17%                    147.48               x 1.74         45.83                        x 2.08                    72.71%                     45.30                   x 2.07




                                                                                                                          20
