                                            Learning Unmasking Policies for
                                            Diffusion Language Models
                                            Metod Jazbec∗† , Theo X. Olausson∗‡ , Louis Béthune, Pierre Ablin, Michael Kirchhof, João Monteiro, Victor
                                            Turrisi, Jason Ramapuram, Marco Cuturi

                                            Apple, University of Amsterdam† , Massachusetts Institute of Technology‡




arXiv:2512.09106v4 [cs.LG] 1 Jun 2026
                                            Diffusion (Large) Language Models (dLLMs) now match the downstream performance of their autoregressive counter-
                                            parts on many tasks, while holding the promise of being more efficient during inference. One critical design aspect of
                                            dLLMs is the sampling procedure that selects which tokens to unmask at each diffusion step. Indeed, recent work has
                                            found that heuristic strategies such as confidence thresholding improve both sample quality and token throughput com-
                                            pared to random unmasking. However, such heuristics have downsides: they require manual tuning, and we observe that
                                            their performance degrades with larger block sizes. In this work, we instead propose to train sampling procedures using
                                            reinforcement learning. Specifically, we formalize masked diffusion sampling as a Markov decision process in which the
                                            dLLM serves as the environment, and propose a lightweight policy based on a single-layer transformer that maps dLLM
                                            token confidences to unmasking decisions. Our experiments show that these trained policies match the performance of
                                            state-of-the-art heuristics when combined with semi-autoregressive (block) generation, while outperforming them in the
                                            full-diffusion setting.

                                            Code: https://github.com/apple/ml-rl-dllm
                                            Correspondence: MJ: m.jazbec@uva.nl; TXO: theoxo@csail.mit.edu; MC: cuturi@apple.com
                                            Contributions: * denotes equal contribution; work done while MJ and TXO were interns at Apple.
                                            Date: June 3, 2026




                                        1   Introduction
                                        Discrete diffusion (Austin et al., 2021a; Hoogeboom et al., 2021; Dieleman et al., 2022; Lou et al., 2024;
                                        Shi et al., 2024) has recently emerged as a compelling alternative to the predominant autoregressive (AR)
                                        modeling paradigm in large language models (LLMs). Unlike AR models, which generate the next token
                                        in a left-to-right fashion (Radford et al., 2018), diffusion LLMs (dLLMs) generate text by learning to re-
                                        verse a noising process that progressively corrupts token sequences. In particular, masked diffusion models
                                        (MDMs; Sahoo et al. 2024; Shi et al. 2024; Ou et al. 2025), a subclass of discrete diffusion models that
                                        use time-dependent BERT-style (Devlin et al., 2019) masking as the forward noising process, have recently
                                        demonstrated impressive performance, with models like LLaDA (Nie et al., 2025) and Dream (Ye et al., 2025)
                                        matching the performance of similarly sized autoregressive LLMs.
                                        At generation time, MDMs begin with a fully masked sequence and iteratively unmask a fixed number of
                                        tokens at randomly sampled positions in each sampling step. As a result, they offer the potential for faster
                                        inference, as they can, in principle, generate multiple tokens in parallel using a single model call. Despite
                                        this promise, open-source dLLMs have, until recently, lagged behind their AR counterparts in terms of
                                        inference efficiency. This changed with Fast-dLLM (Wu et al., 2025), which demonstrated that a dLLM like
                                        LLaDA (Nie et al., 2025) can achieve higher token throughput than similarly sized LLaMA models (Dubey
                                        et al., 2024) while maintaining competitive performance. A key component of Fast-dLLM lies in its sampling
                                        heuristic: instead of unmasking a fixed number of randomly sampled token positions, it proposes to unmask all
                                        tokens whose confidences exceed a pre-specified threshold. This success has since inspired the development of
                                        increasingly sophisticated sampling heuristics (see Section 5 for a comprehensive overview), further advancing


                                                                                                           1
the state of the art. These heuristics can, however, be difficult to tune, and seem to work best when imposing
semi-autoregressive (semi-AR) generation, in which small blocks of tokens are unmasked sequentially (Arriola
et al., 2025a; Nie et al., 2025). We posit that such limitations are difficult to avoid with heuristics alone,
since they are essentially handcrafted solutions to a sequential decision making problem: What is the optimal
order in which to unmask the sequence of tokens, in order to strike a good balance between correctnes and
efficiency?
We address this question by moving beyond heuristics, instead proposing a learning-based approach that
leverages a transformer-based unmasking policy trained via reinforcement learning (RL). This approach is
motivated by the above observation that unmasking in dLLMs can be viewed as a (Markovian) sequential
decision making problem, and follows recent successes in RL for post-training of language models. However, in
contrast to recent works that use RL to improve the reasoning abilities of dLLMs (e.g., Zhao et al. 2025a), our
goal is not to improve the capacity of the underlying model, but rather to use RL to automate the discovery
of adaptive sampling strategies. We therefore treat the underlying dLLM as the environment in which to
act, not the policy, leaving it unchanged and instead parameterizing a policy as a lightweight stand-alone
network (Figure 2). Empirically, we demonstrate that our learned sampling policies match the performance
of state-of-the-art heuristic samplers (Wu et al., 2025) in standard semi-AR generation, while also surpassing
heuristics in full-diffusion setting. In summary, we make the following contributions:
• We formalize sampling in dLLMs as a Markov decision process (MDP) (Section 3.1), propose a lightweight
  design for the unmasking policy (Section 3.2), and outline our RL training pipeline based on group relative
  policy optimization (GRPO; Shao et al. 2024) (Section 3.3).
• Our experiments show that learned policies with our RL framework match the performance of heuristic
  samplers such as Fast-dLLM (Section 4.1), while also addressing some of the challenges heuristic samplers
  face outside the semi-AR regime (Section 4.2).
• We study the transferability of our learned samplers across different models and data domains (Section 4.3),
  and provide detailed insights into stabilizing RL training and policy design (Section 4.4). We also demon-
  strate that policies exhibit qualitatively different unmasking behavior compared to confidence heuristics
  (Appendix C).


2     Background
Throughout the paper, we use the notation [L] to represent the set {1, . . . , L}. We denote a sequence of
tokens as x = (x1 , . . . , xL ) ∈ V L , where L is the sequence length and V := [V ] is the vocabulary. Given our
focus on MDMs, we assume the vocabulary includes a special mask token M .

2.1   Masked Diffusion Models
We focus on masked diffusion models (MDMs), deferring a more general introduction to discrete diffusion to
Appendix G.
Training. MDMs learn to generate data by training a BERT-style (Devlin et al., 2019) masked predictor
to reverse the forward noising process. Concretely, given a training sample x0 ∼ pdata , the forward process
corrupts each token independently by setting it to the mask token with probability proportional to the
diffusion timestep t ∈ [0, 1]:
                                                                               
                                                                               1 − t, if xt = x0 ,
                                                                                            k    k
                                   YL                                          
                  pt (xt | x0 ) :=     pt (xkt | x0 ) , where pt (xkt | x0 ) := t,     if xkt = M ,
                                                                                       otherwise.
                                                                               
                                   k=1                                         
                                                                                0,
Recent work has shown that an MDM parametrized by θ can learn the reverse process by maximizing the
following evidence lower bound (ELBO) (Sahoo et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024; Ou et al., 2025), L(θ) ≤
Ex0 ∼pdata [log pθ (x0 )], denoting 1[·] the indicator function:
                                                                      " L                               #
                                                                       1X
                     L(θ) := Et∼U [0,1], x0 ∼pdata , xt ∼pt (xt |x0 )     1[xkt = M ] log pθ (xk0 | xt ) . (2.1)
                                                                       t
                                                             k=1



                                                        2
Generation. When generating an answer for a given prompt x, MDMs start with a sequence of all-masked
tokens yT := (M , . . . , M ), where L := |yT | is a pre-specified maximum answer length. Then, in each
sampling step t ∈ [T ], the MDM outputs token distributions pkt := pθ (y0k = · | x, yt ) for all token positions
k ∈ [L] and a sampling strategy decides which subset Ut ⊆ Mt of the still-masked positions Mt := {k ∈ [L] |
ytk = M } to unmask. A new, partially unmasked/denoised answer yt−1 is obtained via
                                                (
                                                  y ∼ pkt , if k ∈ Ut ,
                                        k
                                       yt−1 :=                                                             (2.2)
                                                  ytk ,     otherwise.

The stochasticity of sampling y ∼ pkt depends on the dLLM temperature τ , with higher temperatures leading
to more diverse (but often lower quality) generations. When evaluating dLLMs, it is common to set τ = 0
(Nie et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2025), resembling greedy decoding. The choice of sampling/unmasking strategy
is also important, since different choices will produce different unmasking sets Ut , thus affecting both sam-
pling quality and efficiency. This has drawn considerable attention to the development of optimal sampling
techniques for dLLMs (see Section 5).

2.2   Heuristic Samplers                                                         Random          High Confidence          Fast-dLLM

One popular approach to decide which positions Ut to                        80        Semi-AR
unmask at each timestep is to construct a heuristic                                   (BL = 32)
                                                                            70        Full-Diffusion
that leverages uncertainty measures derived from the                                  (BL = 256)
predicted token distributions pkt (Kim et al. 2025a; Wu                     60


                                                             Accuracy [%]
et al. 2025; Ben-Hamu et al. 2025; inter alia). In par-                     50
ticular, recent work has shown substantial efficiency
gains with heuristic strategies that employ the confi-                      40
dence ckt := maxv∈V pkt (v) of the underlying dLLM in or-                   30
der to make their decisions. Two representative methods
within this space are high-confidence unmasking (Chang                      20
et al., 2022), in which each forward pass unmasks a fixed                   10
number of tokens (K) with the highest confidences,                                8       16           32          64   128     256
                                                                                                            NFEs
                                     X
                 UtK := arg max          ckt
                      I⊆Mt , |I|=K k∈I                       Figure 1 LLaDA-8B-Instruct (Nie et al., 2025) on
                                                             GSM8K, with semi-AR generation (BL = 32;        )
as well as the confidence-thresholding strategy of Fast-     and without (full-diffusion regime, BL = L = 256;
dLLM (Wu et al., 2025), which allows for a variable            ). More datasets and models in Appendix B.1.
number of tokens to be unmasked at each step by com-         Generation speed is measured in network function
paring the confidences to a fixed threshold λ:               evaluations (NFEs), which corresponds to the num-
                                                             ber of sampling steps.
               Utλ := {k ∈ Mt | ckt > λ}.

Despite the undeniable success of confidence-based samplers, relying on handcrafted solutions comes with
drawbacks. Beyond the obvious need for careful design (e.g., selecting an appropriate confidence measure
or threshold λ), we also found that these methods often exhibit high sensitivity to the exact sampling
configuration. For instance, many heuristics rely on semi-autoregressive (semi-AR) generation (Arriola et al.,
2025a; Nie et al., 2025), where diffusion decoding proceeds one “block” of contiguous tokens at a time, with
block length BL serving as yet another hyperparameter. As shown in Figure 1, outside this semi-AR regime,
the performance of confidence-based heuristics can degrade below that of a random unmasking, and no longer
benefit from increased compute (i.e., higher numbers of function evaluations, NFEs). These limitations raise
the question of whether effective sampling methods can be learned rather than manually tuned.


3     Learning Unmasking Policies
We now introduce our approach to learn sampling in dLLMs via reinforcement learning (RL). We begin by
formulating sampling as a Markov decision process (MDP) (Section 3.1), then propose a sampling policy
(Section 3.2), and finally provide details on our RL training (Section 3.3).


                                                       3
 3.1   dLLM Sampling as a Markov Decision Process
To facilitate the development of RL-based samplers, we describe first the Markov decision process (MDP)
(Sutton et al., 1998) for sampling in dLLMs. To stay aligned with the MDM notation in Section 2.1, we
reverse the time in our MDP formulation: t = T, T −1, . . . , 1, with T denoting the maximum horizon (number
of sampling steps).
• The state (x, yt ) holds a prompt x and the current (partially masked) generation yt . For brevity, we omit x
  from the state notation unless needed. The initial state has a fully masked generation: yT = (M , . . . , M ).
• An action ut ∈ {0, 1}L is a vector of unmasking decisions indicating which positions have been selected to
  be unmasked in the next transition step. These actions are chosen according to the policy πϕ : ut ∼ πϕ (· | yt )
  (introduced later in Section 3.2).
• The transition yt−1 ∼ P (yt−1 | yt , ut ; τ ) corresponds to standard sampling in dLLMs (cf. Equation (2.2)),
  with the action ut determining which tokens get unmasked: Utπ := {k ∈ Mt | ukt = 1}.
• The reward R(y, yt ) is provided only at the final generation step, which corresponds to the first timestep
  where all tokens have been unmasked T̂ := max{t ∈ [T ] | ytk ̸= M , ∀k ∈ [L]}. To learn useful samplers, the
  reward should promote both correctness (i.e., the generated answer yT̂ being ‘close’ to the reference answer
  y) and efficiency (i.e., minimizing the number of steps T − T̂ ). Note that the reward depends on action ut ,
  and therefore on the policy πϕ , implicitly through its influence on the generations yt and the number of
  steps. We defer our concrete choice of the reward function to Section 3.3.
With the MDP above, finding the optimal sampling becomes a standard RL problem of finding a policy πϕ
parametrized by ϕ that maximizes the expected reward:
                                                                T
                                                                X           
                             max E(x,y)∼pdata , ut ∼πϕ , yt ∼P     R(y, yt ) .
                                       ϕ
                                                                      t=1



 3.2   Lightweight Confidence Policy Design
                                                                        yt     [M]         Isaac      [M]          [M]
 Having outlined the MDP above, we next describe
 our proposed implementation for the sampling pol-
 icy πϕ (see Figure 2 for policy sampling diagram                                                                         ❄
                                                                                             dLLM pθ
 and Appendix A for sampling algorithm).                                              Frozen · ~7-8B parameters


 Confidence-based input.          Recall that a state con-
                                                                                                      0.82
 sists of a partially masked token sequence yt . To                            0.40
                                                                                             —                     0.74

                                                                        ct
 avoid constructing policies that operate at the to-
 ken level, and thereby minimize computational
 overhead, we rely on the vector of token confi-
 dences ct := (c1t , . . . , cL
                              t ), which are readily avail-                      Unmasking Policy (π)
 able since the token-level predictive distributions                                  Learned · ~300K parameters
 pkt are computed at each transition step yt−1 ∼ P
 anyways. Our choice is further motivated by the
 aforementioned heuristic methods that primarily                        ut      0           —          1            1
 operate on confidences (Wu et al., 2025), and
 also based on our own ablations (see Section 4.4).
 Specifically, we observed that alternatively rely-                     yt-1   [M]         Isaac   Newton           .
 ing on dLLM’s hidden states required significantly
 larger policy models without consistently improv-
                                                              Figure 2 Diagram showing how our policies are used on top
 ing performance.                                             of a pretrained dLLM to unmask tokens and generate text.

 Lightweight transformer.    We introduce a small,
learnable neural network fϕ that maps the vector of confidences ct to a vector of unmasking scores (log-
its) bt = fϕ (ct , mt , t) with bt ∈ RL . We additionally include a binary mask vector mt := (m1t , . . . , mL
                                                                                                             t ),
where mkt := 1[k ∈ Mt ] indicates whether position k is still masked, and inform the policy with the time


                                                              4
index t ∈ [T ]. In practice, fϕ is implemented as a lightweight transformer (see Section 4 for more details
on the exact policy architecture). Notably, its size is less than 0.01% of the pretrained dLLMs used in our
experiments, resulting in negligible computational overhead during sampling (see Figure 12).

                      We sample the unmasking actions via ukt ∼ Ber skt with skt := σ(bkt ), where Ber(·)
                                                                                
Bernoulli likelihood.
denotes the Bernoulli distribution and σ(·) is the sigmoid function. Conveniently, the policy likelihood
           QL          k                k
πϕ (ut ) := k=1 (skt )ut · (1 − skt )1−ut is readily available in closed form and does not require any additional
approximations (unlike in the case of post-training dLLMs; Zhao et al. 2025a). We also considered an
alternative formulation based on the Plackett-Luce model (Luce, 1959; Plackett, 1975) which we call dynamic
Plackett-Luce sampling (DPLS; see Appendix E), but since our ablations showed comparable performance
(Section 4.4), we favor the Bernoulli formulation in our experiments for its simplicity.
At generation, we additionally propose to “temper”
the Bernoulli probabilities as skt := σ(bkt /τπ ). The                                              α = 10.0               α = 3.0                   α = 1.0
temperature τπ thus controls the sharpness of the                                                              α = 0.3                     α = 0.0
policy distribution; we found that this can some-
                                                                                         0.4
times serve as a useful test-time knob for trading                                                                                   200


                                                                           Correctness                                   Mean NFEs
off accuracy versus efficiency by making the policy                                      0.3
more or less “decisive” (Section 4).                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                     100
                                                                                         0.1
To ensure convergence when all sampled actions
are zero (ut = 0), we unmask the position with             0.0                           0
                                                               0 200 400 600 800           0 200 400 600 800
the highest Bernoulli parameter st (similar to Fast-
                                  k                                Training Step                Training Step
dLLM). We apply this fallback only at test time,
as we found that forcing unmasking during train-       Figure 3 Correctness reward (rolling average, 20 steps) on
ing was prone to reward hacking. Instead, if not all   GSM8K (left) and average number of sampling steps (right)
                                                       during training of our policies for various values of α (cf.
tokens are unmasked within T steps during train-
                                                       Equation (3.1)). Averaged over two random seeds, with
ing, we simply terminate generation and evaluate       shaded areas indicating (min, max); only one seed shown
the answer with some tokens left unmasked. Since       for α = 10.0 ( ) due to training instability.
such samples tend to get low or no reward, we find
that the policies quickly learn not to leave any tokens unmasked without explicit instruction.

3.3    Learning πϕ with GRPO
To train our sampling policy, we adopt group relative policy optimization (GRPO) (Shao et al., 2024), a
method recently popularized as a simpler and more scalable alternative to earlier policy gradient approaches
such as PPO (Schulman et al., 2017). Specifically, for each prompt x ∈ D, we sample G trajectories of gener-
                                                                                     g            g
ations {yTg , . . . , yT̂g }G
                            g=1 along with their corresponding unmasking decisions {uT , . . . , uT̂ }g=1 . Importantly,
                                                                                                      G
                        g                                                                                                                   g
we fix the dLLM sampling temperature τ to 0 (i.e., greedy decoding) to ensure that any variation among sam-
ples within a group arises solely from different unmasking actions.
                                                                PG After computing       rewards for each sample
in the group, we define the advantage as Agt := R(y, yT̂g ) − G
                                                              1
                                                                 i=1 R(y, y i
                                                                            T̂
                                                                               ) , following recent best practices
                                                                          g                                    i
that recommend omitting standard deviation normalization of advantages (Zhao et al., 2025a). Additionally,
note that the reward at the final generation step T̂g for each sample is propagated to all preceding timesteps
t to provide a learning signal throughout the entire sampling process. Our final training objective is then
                                                                     G                         T                                                              
                                                                   1 X     1     X
                                                                                   min ρgt · Agt , clip(ρgt , 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ) · Agt
                                                                                      
J (ϕ) := E(x,y)∼D, {yg            }G ∼Pθ , {ug     }G ∼πϕold
                            T :T̂g g=1       T :T̂g g=1            G g=1 T − T̂g
                                                                                               t=T̂g

where πϕ is the current policy being updated, and πϕold refers to an earlier version of the policy used to
                                                       π (ug )
generate the RL rollouts. The likelihood ratio ρgt := πϕ ϕ (ut g ) serves as the importance sampling correction
                                                        old    t
term, which together with clipping (via ϵ) aims to stabilize the off-policy training. Note that we exclude
already-unmasked positions from the policy likelihood computation. Finally, since our policies are trained
from scratch, we remove the KL regularization term in our GRPO objective.



                                                                       5
                             Random             High Confidence                  Fast-dLLM                   Ours               Ours (with ES)
               80                              80



Accuracy [%]
                                                                                     30                                30
               60                              60
               40                              40                                    20                                20

               20                              20                                    10                                10
                    8   16   32   64 128 256        8   16   32   64   128 256            8   16   32   64   128 256        8     16   32   64   128 256
                             NFEs                            NFEs                                  NFEs                                NFEs
               (a) GSM8K, BL = 32               (b) GSM8K, BL = 256                  (c) MATH-500, BL = 32             (d) MATH-500, BL = 256

 Figure 4 Results for LLaDA in semi-AR (Figure 4a & Figure 4c) and full-diffusion (Figure 4b & Figure 4d) generation
 regimes (L = 256). Results for Dream-7B are provided in Figure 13. For our policies we vary α ∈ {10, 3, 1, 0.3, 0} and
 use τπ = 0.5 for BL = 32 and τπ = 1 for BL = 256. Expert steering (ES) described in detail in Appendix F. Wall-
 clock time plots shown in Figure 12. For plot readability, we leave out some baselines (Kim et al., 2025a; Ben-Hamu
 et al., 2025) here and provide the comparison with them in Figure 11.


 Reward.   As mentioned in Section 3.1, we wish to obtain a policy that yields ‘correct’ generations while also
 being fast. To this end, we define our final multiplicative reward as
                                             (                     α
                                               r(y, yt ) · 1 − TT−t , if t = T̂ ,
                                R(y, yt ) :=                                                              (3.1)
                                               0,                      otherwise,

where r(y, yt ) is a task-specific correctness term (e.g., a binary reward indicating whether the generated
mathematical answer is correct). To encourage faster sampling, we incorporate a computational penalty
based on the number of steps, T − T̂ , with α ≥ 0 serving as a hyperparameter that controls the trade-off
between accuracy and speed. While we experimented with an additive penalty of the form r(y, yT̂ )−α T −         T̂
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                              T
(Graves, 2016) we found that this led to problematic reward hacking: when all samples in a group are incorrect,
as is the case early on when training from scratch, faster samples may still receive a positive advantage, despite
being wrong (cf. Section 4.4).


 4                  Experiments
We begin by verifying that the learned policies match the performance of confidence-based heuristics (Sec-
tion 4.1). We then highlight the potential of RL sampling to outperform heuristics in the full-diffusion setting
(Section 4.2), and examine the transferability of RL policies across models, datasets, and generation lengths
(Section 4.3). Next, we explore different ways to instantiate the MDP and analyze their effects on perfor-
mance (Section 4.4). Finally, we study the unmasking behavior of RL policies, highlighting their qualitative
differences to heuristics (details in Appendix C).

 4.1                Learning Effective Sampling via RL
 We start by demonstrating that our proposed RL framework yields effective sampling strategies in dLLMs,
 where effectiveness is defined in terms of both accuracy and speed.

 Experiment details. We use LLaDA-8B-Instruct (Nie et al., 2025) as the base dLLM (additional results on
 Dream-7B-Instruct (Ye et al., 2025) provided in Appendix B.4). We parametrize the policy network fϕ as
 a shallow (single-layer) transformer incorporating adaptive layer normalization for conditioning; hyperpa-
 rameter details for the architecture are provided in Appendix H and an architecture diagram can be found
 in Appendix I. We train five different policies, corresponding to α ∈ {10, 3, 1, 0.3, 0}. Each policy is trained
 semi-autoregressively at BL = 32 on a single epoch of mixture data, sampled proportionally from the training
 sets of GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) and MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021), resulting in roughly 15,000 training
 samples. Figure 3 shows the training dynamics; as expected, higher α generally gives rise to faster policies.


                                                                                 6
                             20                     Policy (α = 0.3)                                                  Policy (α = 10)




            NFEs per Block                                                    NFEs per Block
                                                    Fast-dLLM (λ = 0.9)                        4                      Fast-dLLM (λ = 0.1)
                             15
                                                                                               3
                             10
                                                                                               2
                             5
                                                                                               1
                             0
                                  1   2   3     4    5      6   7     8                            1   2   3     4    5      6    7     8
                                              Block Index                                                      Block Index

                                      (a) BL32-slow (       )                                          (b) BL32-fast (       )

Figure 5 Average number of sampling steps (NFEs) per block for LLaDA on GSM8K with semi-AR generation (same
setting as in Figure 4a). Left we show NFEs per block for ‘slow’ variants of Fast-dLLM and policy sampling (∼ 75
NFEs), while in the right plot we show ‘fast’ variants (∼ 10 NFEs). Fast-dLLM exhibits a pattern of allocating more
compute to earlier blocks. Our policy sampling, by contrast, distributes compute more uniformly across blocks, except
in the fast (α = 10) policy, where most compute is expended in the final block while generating numerical answers.
To see where evaluated policies here are located on the pareto frontier, see Figure 21a. More details on qualitative
differences between Fast-dLLM and policy sampling are provided in Appendix C.


We then compare the resulting policies on the test sets of both GSM8K and MATH to the confidence-based
heuristics introduced in Section 2.2, picking one out of two training seeds based on the final training loss
and averaging over three test-time seeds. To obtain Pareto frontiers for the heuristic methods, we use
K ∈ {8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256} for the random baseline and high-confidence unmasking, while for Fast-dLLM we
use λ ∈ {0.1, 0.2, . . . , 1.0} throughout. For all methods, we use the standard greedy decoding setting (τ = 0)
when generating test answers.

                                                   Generally, we observe that the performance of the learned
Results for (Short) BL = 32, Figure 4a and Figure 4c.
policies ( ) exceeds those of both the random baseline ( ) as well as the high-confidence sampling ( ), while
matching Fast-dLLM ( ). That our learned policies do not surpass Fast-dLLM in the mid-to-high NFEs
range may suggest that this heuristic is near-optimal under semi-AR generation. Interestingly, despite very
similar quantitative performance, we find that the learned policies exhibit qualitatively somewhat different
unmasking behavior compared to Fast-dLLM (see Appendix C). Concretely, the policy unmasks adjacent
tokens much less frequently (Figure 24) and allocates compute more uniformly across blocks (Figure 5a).
We note that the effect of α in training (cf. Figure 3) carries over to the test set: policies trained with higher
values of α exhibit faster, yet less accurate, sampling. Of particular note is α = 10.0, which exhibited greater
training instability due to the very sharp slope of the reward. When successfully trained, this yields a very
fast policy that outperforms Fast-dLLM in the low-NFE (∼ 10) regime on both datasets. Qualitatively, we
find evidence that this improved performance is likely due to the policy learning to slow down in the final
block when generating a numerical answer, as shown in Figure 5b (see also Appendix C for more details).
This highlights the potential of RL-based policies when optimizing for maximal efficiency.
However, RL policies appear to exhibit less controllability, as varying α (at train-time) results in a less
smooth traversal of the Pareto frontier than varying the confidence threshold λ in Fast-dLLM (at test-time).
For example, the behavior of the α = 3.0 policy is nearly identical to that of α = 1.0, despite the reward
incorporating a computational penalty that scales exponentially with α. Furthermore, we find that this cannot
easily be remedied by using a tighter α grid. In Appendix B.5 we let α range in {10.0, 9.0, ...1.0, 0.3, 0.0}, but
observe that using α ≥ 4.0 consistently results in converging to a policy either roughly equivalent to that of
α = 3.0 or to that of α = 10.0, with no value of α successfully yielding a policy which interpolates between
the two extremes.
To test whether the speed-accuracy trade-off can be controlled at test-time instead, we experiment with
post-hoc scaling of the unmasking probabilities obtained from a policy trained with α = 1. Concretely,
following Chen et al. (2025a) we introduce a free parameter β > 0 and scale the Bernoulli probabilities skt


                                                                          7
                                        Fast-dLLM        Train-time pareto           Test-time pareto
                               80



                Accuracy [%]
                                                                     30
                               60
                               40                                    20

                               20                                    10
                                    8   16   32     64 128 256            8     16    32   64    128 256
                                             NFEs                                     NFEs
                                    (a) GSM8K, BL = 32                        (b) MATH-500, BL = 32

Figure 6 Scaling unmasking probabilites at test-time as uk                   k
                                                         t ∼ Ber(min{1, β · st }) for β ∈ R+ leads to smoother pareto
froniter compared to changing α (Equation (3.1)) at train-time. Results for LLaDA in semi-AR regime. Note that
results for Fast-dLLM and train-time pareto of policy sampling are reproduced from Figure 4.


as ukt ∼ Ber(min{1, β · skt }). When β > 1, this increases the average number of tokens unmasked per step,
whereas β < 1 decreases it. By varying β, the behavior of a policy trained at a fixed α can thus be modulated
without retraining. Encouragingly, as shown in Figure 6, this turns out to be an effective test-time knob,
smoothly navigating the accuracy-efficiency frontier. At mid-to-high NFEs (low β) the policy mostly matches
the Fast-dLLM semi-AR frontier, while outperforming it at lower NFEs (high β). For example, on MATH-500
at around 25 NFEs, the policy achieves 20% accuracy compared to Fast-dLLM’s 10%. Besides β, we also
observe that one can make small changes to the trade-off between compute and performance by varying the
policy temperature τπ at test time; we detail the impact of this parameter in Figure 16.

4.2   Beyond Semi-Autoregressive Decoding
As mentioned in Section 2.2, heuristic samplers often rely on semi-AR generation to achieve good performance.
While not typically thought of as problematic in textual domains where strong AR dependencies exist, semi-
AR approaches can only partially fulfill the promise of fully parallel generation by restricting the unmasking
to the current block. Hence, we train here policies without semi-AR generation, targeting the full-diffusion
task (BL = L = 256) at both training and test time. We keep all other implementation details identical to
those in the previous section.

                                                  Although all sampling strategies experience a performance
Results for (Long) BL = 256, Figure 4b & Figure 4d.
drop relative to the semi-AR setting (cf. Figure 4a & Figure 4c), we find that the policies produced by RL
( ) exhibit the smallest decline and consequently achieve the best overall performance. Furthermore, the
results suggest that this methodology is able to produce policies which achieve solid performance even in
the low-NFE regime. In particular, the learned policies obtain ∼ 50% accuracy at ∼ 12 NFEs on GSM8K
(compared to ≤ 30% for the heuristic methods regardless of semi-AR use), highlighting the potential of non-
semi-AR sampling for achieving maximal efficiency gains. Note however that, in theory, an RL policy trained
with BL = L could learn to emulate semi-AR sampling on its own. Thus, the fact that policies trained with
BL = L underperform those trained with BL = 32 in the mid-high NFE range (comparing, for example,
Figure 4a to Figure 4b) suggests that the policies remain far from optimal.
One hypothesis for why this is the case is that our training procedure is not encouraging sufficient exploration,
instead converging to locally optimal policies. To address this, we encourage further exploration by using
samples generated via semi-AR sampling from Fast-dLLM. We refer to this approach as expert steering,
and describe it in more detail in Appendix F. As shown in Figure 4, with expert steering ( ) RL is able
to discover policies that almost close the performance gap to the best accuracy achieved in the semi-AR
setting at mid-to-high NFEs (e.g., ∼ 80% on GSM8K and ∼ 35% on MATH), while mostly retaining their
strong performance in the low-NFE regime. However, we do find that expert steering introduces significant
instability during training, further reducing the controllability through α, with multiple values of α collapsing


                                                                 8
                         Random          High Confidence         Fast-dLLM             Ours                                     Ours (with ES)            Ours (trained on KodCode)
               80                                50                                    40                                                                80
                                                 40


Accuracy [%]
               60                                                                      30                                                                60
                                                 30
               40                                20                                    20                                                                40
               20                                10                                    10                                                                20
               0                                  0                                     0                                                                 0
                    8     16   32   64 128 256        32   64          128   256            32                              64          128        256        8   16 32 64 128 256 512
                               NFEs                             NFEs                                                             NFEs                                  NFEs
 (a) Model transfer: LLaDA (b) Domain transfer: math (c) Domain transfer: math (d) Sequence length transfer:
 → Dream on GSM8K.                               → coding (HumanEval).                 → coding (MBPP).                                                  256 → 512 (GSM8K).

 Figure 8 Results for the transferability experiments. Note that in (a), the α = 10 policy is represented separately by
 a ( ) in the lower left to avoid misleading visualization when interpolating to α = 3. For results on coding datasets
 in (b) and (c), we omit the low-NFE regime, as all approaches degrade to near-zero performance in this setting.


 to near-identical policies. We leave further investigations into stabilizing expert steering training for future
 work. Finally, we observe that policy sampling and Fast-dLLM induce markedly different unmasking orders
 in the full-diffusion
setting (see Figure 7 and Appendix C). While Fast-




                                                                                                 Mean Unmasking Time (t)
                                                                                                                                          Policy (α = 0.3)
dLLM exhibits reverse (right-to-left) unmasking, the                                                                       80             Policy-ES (α = 0.3)
policy with expert steering learns to overcome this be-                                                                                   Fast-dLLM (λ = 0.9)
havior and unmasks earlier positions first on average                                                                      60
(left-to-right), which likely explains its superior perfor-
                                                                                                                           40
mance.
                                                                                                                           20
 4.3                    Transferability of RL Sampling Policies
                                                                                                                           0
 We next turn to the question of transferability. A no-                                                                          1            64          128          192        256
 table advantage of heuristic approaches is that they can                                                                                           Token Position (k)
 be applied post-hoc to any model or dataset.1 This nat-
 urally raises the question: to what extent can RL poli-                                      Figure 7 Mean unmasking time for each token posi-
 cies trained on a specific model and dataset be reused                                       tion (L = 256), averaged over N = 100 samples,
 in other settings?                                                                           for LLaDA on GSM8K under full-diffusion genera-
                                                                                              tion (same setting as in Figure 4b). For visualization
 Model transfer: LLaDA → Dream.    We begin by investi-                                       purposes, time is shown in reverse. Fast-dLLM ( )
                                                                                              exhibits somewhat reverse (i.e., right-to-left) genera-
gating the transferability of RL policies across models;
                                                                                              tion due to LLaDA’s corrupted confidence on padding
note that such transfers are possible because our poli-                                       tokens (see Appendix C). Encouragingly, the expert
cies rely solely on token confidences and are therefore                                       steering policy ( ) learns to overcome this issue and
agnostic to token embeddings, which would not transfer                                        recovers left-to-right generation (observe how tokens
from one model to another. We thus reuse the policies                                         at earlier positions are generated first on average).
trained on LLaDA (cf. Section 4.1) and evaluate them                                          The locations of the evaluated policies on the Pareto
on Dream; the results are shown in Figure 8a (see Fig-                                        frontier are shown in Figure 21b (see ).
ure 17 for MATH). Encouragingly, most of the LLaDA-
trained policies nearly match the performance of Fast-dLLM when evaluated on Dream, and perform very
similarly to those trained on Dream directly (Figure 13). The one exception is the α = 10 policy ( ), which
collapses to Fast-dLLM performance and fails to retain the good low-NFE performance observed with LLaDA
(cf. Figure 4a)—suggesting that the extreme steepness of the reward curve (due to high α) causes this policy
to overfit to model-specific patterns in LLaDA’s confidence levels.

                                                Next, we examine how well our policies transfer across differ-
 Domain transfer: Mathematical reasoning to code.
 ent domains. We again reuse the policies from Section 4.1, which were trained on a mixture of mathematical
               1 Though heuristics might still require manual hyperparameter tuning, as exemplified by different optimal threshold across

 datasets for Fast-dLLM (e.g., comparing Figure 4a vs Figure 8b).


                                                                                   9
data (GSM8K/MATH), but this time evaluate them on the coding tasks of HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021)
and MBPP (Austin et al., 2021b). As shown in Figure 8b and Figure 8c ( ), we find that these policies
fail to fully transfer to the coding domains, especially on HumanEval. To investigate whether this drop in
performance is due to the lack of domain-relevant training data, we train a new policy on the coding dataset
KodCode-RL-10K (Xu et al., 2025) ( ). These coding policies narrow the gap to the Fast-dLLM baseline on
HumanEval and improve low-NFE performance on MBPP, underscoring the importance of using a diverse
data mixture to support generalization across domains.

Sequence length generalization: L = 256 → L = 512.        We next study whether our policies transfer across
different sequence lengths L (not to be confused with the block length BL in semi-AR). Such transfer is
possible since we instantiate fθ with a transformer, rather than, for example, an MLP (which requires fixed-
length inputs). We thus take the policies from Section 4.2 and evaluate them at a 2x longer sequence length
(L = 512). Results are shown in Figure 8d (see Figure 18 for MATH). While the baselines degrade further
as the sequence length increases, the learned policies yield similar performance to before, suggesting that RL
policies can transfer effectively across generation lengths without retraining.

Non-greedy decoding (τ > 0).    Lastly, we consider non-greedy decoding, i.e., using τ > 0 when sampling the
tokens in Equation (2.2).2 To measure performance, we report pass@k rates, which track the probability
that at least one of the k generations is correct. As shown in Figure 19, policy sampling yields higher pass@k
rates than Fast-dLLM sampling, and the gap widens with k (+0.98% for k = 1 versus +2.56% for k = 32
on average across datasets). This shows that the policy’s stochastic Bernoulli sampling explores the solution
space more effectively and helps prevent the recently discovered diversity collapse of deterministic confidence-
based samplers (Ni et al., 2026; Olausson et al., 2026). Beyond pass@k, policy sampling also dominates
Fast-dLLM when selecting the final generation via self-consistency or an external reward model (Figure 19).

4.4    Exploring the Design Space of πϕ
Additive vs. multiplicative rewards.We begin by ablating the structure of the reward function, comparing our
proposed multiplicative combination of correctness and computational terms (cf. Equation (3.1)) with an
additive alternative: r(y, yT̂ ) − α T − T̂
                                              . As shown in Figure 9a, while both exhibit increasing reward as
                                            
                                       T
training progresses, we observe that the additive formulation is much more prone to ‘reward hacking’, where
it collapses to a very-fast-but-often-wrong policy. This is illustrated in Figure 9b: training with the additive
reward results in a policy that unmasks everything at once, leading the number of sampling steps to collapse
to the minimum possible for all inputs. As discussed in Section 3.3, we attribute this issue to the fact that
incorrect but fast samples may still receive a positive advantage under the additive reward. In contrast, we
find that the multiplicative reward effectively mitigates this issue by assigning a positive advantage only if
the generation is correct, resulting in more stable and predictable training behavior.

Policy likelihood.Recall from Section 3.2 that we model the unmasking probability for each position using a
Bernoulli distribution. This has the advantage of admitting very efficient inference and likelihood calculations,
but relies on the network fϕ to implicitly embed relationships between different tokens in the scores bt , and
runs the risk of producing Utπ = ∅ in case ut = 0. Here, we therefore investigate a more involved sampling
procedure, which we call dynamic Plackett-Luce sampling (DPLS; detailed description in Appendix E) which
is guaranteed to unmask at least one position in each step and which combines the scores bt through a softmax.
We retrain the policies from Section 4.1 using DPLS; the resulting downstream accuracy on GSM8K is then
shown in Figure 9c. We observe that both methods achieve very similar performance, aligning closely with
the Fast-dLLM, which might provide additional support for the hypothesis that this frontier is optimal in
the semi-AR setting. Furthermore, DPLS policies appear to show slightly better controllability via α (as
indicated by a larger spread of policies trained with varying α).

Confidence-based policy input. Finally, we revisit our design choice of relying solely on the maximum token
confidence values ckt as input to the sampling policy (cf. Section 3.2). We first train and evaluate a set
of policies which do not take only the highest confidence per position ckt as input, but rather the top 50
   2 In the non-greedy case, we define the token confidence as ck := pk (y | x, y ), y ∼ p (· | x, y ; τ ).
                                                                t     θ          t        θ         t



                                                                  10
                                                                                                    Ours                 Ours (top-50 confidence input)
                   Multiplicative Reward                Additive Reward                             Ours (DPLS)          Ours (hidden state input)
         0.5
                                                                                          80                                             80



                                                                           Accuracy [%]                                   Accuracy [%]
                                              200
                                                                                          60                                             60
Reward
         0.0
                                       NFEs   100                                         40                                             40
         0.5
                                                                                          20                                             20
                                               0
               0    250   500   750                 0   200 400 600 800                        32      64    128   256                        32   64   128   256
                     Training Step                        Training Step                                  NFEs                                       NFEs
(a)   Training reward for (b) Mean NFEs when train- (c) Bernoulli vs DPLS sam- (d) Bernoulli policies with
LLaDA with additive vs. ing LLaDA with additive vs. pling. Both for LLaDA on varying inputs.       All for
multiplicative reward func- multiplicative reward (both GSM8K.                 LLaDA on GSM8K.
tion (both α = 1.0).        α = 1.0).

                                              Figure 9 Ablations for our proposed RL framework.



highest values, thus giving the model more detailed information about the token predictive distributions
pkt and potentially allowing it to design its own confidences measures for effective sampling. The results
are presented in Figure 9d. Somewhat surprisingly, using only the maximum confidence per position ( )
performs slightly better than using the top-50 confidences ( ), which suggests that alternative uncertainty
measures are unlikely to yield performance gains over the simple confidences ckt .
Additionally, we explore parametrizing the policy as an additional classification head on top of LLaDA’s final
hidden state hkt ∈ RH . While this results in a significantly larger policy (300M parameters), it offers the
potential advantage of incorporating token-level semantic information. However, in practice we observe that
hidden state-based policies perform worse (see      in Figure 9d) and exhibit less stable training dynamics than
the confidence-based policies. These results suggest that the unembedding matrix W ∈ RH×V , which maps
hidden states to token logits, plays a vital role in enabling effective policy decisions via confidence signals.3
Lastly, we investigate whether additional inputs to the policy, such as the time step and mask vector, con-
tribute meaningfully to performance. Concretely, we run a test-time experiment in which we zero out i) the
time t, ii) the mask vector mt , or iii) both. As shown in Figure 20, the policy relies on both inputs: zeroing
either leads to a drop in accuracy, with removing the mask causing the larger drop.


5         Related work
Heuristic samplers for dLLMs.    Sampling in diffusion LLMs (dLLMs) (Nie et al., 2025; Ye et al., 2025) has
recently attracted significant attention, with much of the work in this area proposing heuristic approaches to
improve the decoding process in a training-free manner. Throughout this paper, we focus on Fast-dLLM (Wu
et al., 2025) as a representative heuristic method, as it popularized confidence-thresholded sampling in dLLMs
and demonstrated its crucial role in enabling faster inference in dLLMs compared to autoregressive models.
Many recently proposed heuristics can be viewed as either reinterpretations or extensions of such confidence
thresholding strategies (Ben-Hamu et al., 2025; Wei et al., 2025; Hong et al., 2025a; Li et al., 2025a; Yu et al.,
2025; Kim et al., 2025b; Shen et al., 2025). Other notable heuristic approaches explore incorporating spatial
(Huang et al., 2025a) or temporal information (Wang et al., 2025a), alternative confidence measures (Kim
et al., 2025a), or more explicit modeling of token dependencies (Azangulov et al., 2025). In this work, we aim
to complement ongoing research on sampling heuristics by investigating whether effective sampling strategies
can be learned directly via reinforcement learning. Note that beyond improving the efficiency of unmasking
in dLLMs, heuristics have also been proposed for remasking (Hong et al., 2025a; Dong et al., 2025) and for
dynamically adjusting the generation length (Li et al., 2025b), which we do not target in this work.
    3 Similar findings have been reported in the early-exit literature (Schuster et al., 2022), where confidence-based stopping

criteria have been shown to significantly outperform those relying on hidden state representations.




                                                                          11
Reinforcement learning post-training for dLLMs.   Early work on post-training diffusion LLMs via reinforcement
learning includes d1 (Zhao et al., 2025a), which introduces a variant of GRPO tailored to dLLMs, and
DiffuCoder (Gong et al., 2025), which focuses on enhancing the coding abilities of LLaDA-style models using
RL. Most recent extensions aim to improve the quality of policy gradient estimators (Tang et al., 2025; Wang
et al., 2025b; Lin et al., 2025; Rojas et al., 2025; Zhu et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025c; Zhan, 2026), and have
demonstrated promising results in further enhancing the reasoning capabilities of dLLMs. The key distinction
from our approach is that these methods use a fixed sampling strategy (e.g., high-confidence sampling), and
the policy corresponds to the dLLM itself (or a LoRA-augmented version for efficiency). Closest to our
work are DCOLT (Huang et al., 2025b), which trains a separate unmasking module (with a fixed number of
unmasked tokens in each step) in addition to updating the base model via RL, and DiFFPO (Zhao et al.,
2025b), which jointly learns an unmasking confidence threshold while updating the base model through RL.
Differently to both these works, our primary goal is not in improving the reasoning abilities of the underlying
dLLM; hence we keep the underlying dLLM fixed and focus solely on training a standalone policy with the
aim of learning fast and adaptive sampling while preserving the performance of the base model. Another
related concurrent work is Hong et al. (2025b) where an unmasking policy for dLLMs trained via GRPO
is proposed, similar to our approach. However, their policy unmasks a fixed number of tokens at each step
(similar to DCOLT), whereas ours dynamically adapts the number of tokens to unmask via our Bernoulli
formulation. Finally, Seed Diffusion (Song et al., 2025) identifies computation-aware reinforcement learning
as a key ingredient for achieving competitive efficiency in closed-source coding dLLMs.

Orthogonal efforts to accelerate dLLMs.  Besides the aforementioned heuristic-based sampling innovations, other
efforts to improve inference efficiency in dLLMs (Ma et al., 2025) include KV caching (Jiang et al., 2025; Wu
et al., 2025), (variants of) speculative decoding (Israel et al., 2025; Campbell et al., 2025; Guo and Ermon,
2025; Wu and Zhang, 2025), training separate decoder modules during pretraining (Liu et al., 2025a; Arriola
et al., 2025b), and diffusion forcing (Wang et al., 2025d), among others. Concurrent work explores distilling
faster generation patterns directly into the base model (Chen et al., 2025b), or training a (small) separate
unmasking network on top of the pretrained dLLM (Bansal and Sanghavi, 2025; Bao et al., 2025). Crucially,
unlike our approach, where this training is done via RL, these works train unmasking modules by distilling
generation trajectories from the base model. As a result, we expect that such approaches may still inherit
limitations observed in dLLM sampling, such as difficulties in the non semi-AR regime (cf. Section 2.2).

Reinforcement learning for adaptive computation.   Since our sampling policies result in a variable number of
sampling steps (T − T̂ ) per input, our work connects to the broader literature on adaptive computation
(Graves, 2016; Teerapittayanon et al., 2016). Notable examples of using RL to learn input-dependent compute
policies include conditional computation with stochastic gating (Bengio et al., 2015), dynamic block skipping
in residual networks (Wang et al., 2018), and RL-based early-exit decisions for long chain-of-thought reasoning
(Dai et al., 2025). To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to explore learning adaptive policies using
RL for the task of sampling in dLLMs. The closest related concurrent work is DiFFPO (Zhao et al., 2025b);
however, unlike our approach–where the policy is learned end-to-end–DiFFPO learns to predict adaptive
thresholds, which are then used in the same fashion as the fixed thresholds employed by Fast-dLLM (Wu
et al., 2025). Concurrently, there is also a growing body of work that uses RL to introduce adaptivity into
reasoning chains of autoregressive LLMs (Arora and Zanette, 2025; Yi et al., 2025).


6    Conclusion
We introduced a reinforcement learning approach for learning unmasking strategies in diffusion LLMs. Our
experiments demonstrated that the learned policies can match or even exceed the performance of recently
proposed sampling heuristics, paving the way for the automated discovery of scalable and robust sampling
mechanisms. Furthermore, we have given quantitative and qualitative insight into how to best train and
deploy such unmasking policies across several reasoning and code domains.

Limitations and future work.  Our core approach involves training a separate policy for each α. Overall this is
an effective strategy for trading off accuracy and efficiency, but it can be expensive and might not always
yield sufficiently fine-grained control (Section 4.1). Our experiments suggest that test-time interventions


                                                        12
may be a promising alternative (Figure 6 and Figure 16), but more work is needed to say for certain what
the most effective and useful strategy for navigating the accuracy-efficiency frontier is. Beyond addressing
these limitations, promising directions for future work include (i) expanding the training mixture to multiple
domains; (ii) learning to remask previously unmasked tokens (Wang et al., 2025e; Huang et al., 2025c), and
(iii) moving beyond text and applying our methodology to multimodal masked diffusion models (Swerdlow
et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2025; Bethune et al., 2026).


References
Jacob Austin, Daniel D Johnson, Jonathan Ho, Daniel Tarlow, and Rianne Van Den Berg. Structured denoising
  diffusion models in discrete state-spaces. NeurIPS, 2021a.
Emiel Hoogeboom, Didrik Nielsen, Priyank Jaini, Patrick Forré, and Max Welling. Argmax flows and multinomial
 diffusion: Learning categorical distributions. NeurIPS, 2021.
Sander Dieleman, Laurent Sartran, Arman Roshannai, Nikolay Savinov, Yaroslav Ganin, Pierre H Richemond,
  Arnaud Doucet, Robin Strudel, Chris Dyer, Conor Durkan, et al. Continuous diffusion for categorical data.
  arXiv:2211.15089, 2022.
Aaron Lou, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Discrete diffusion modeling by estimating the ratios of the data
  distribution. In ICML, 2024.
Jiaxin Shi, Kehang Han, Zhe Wang, Arnaud Doucet, and Michalis K. Titsias. Simplified and generalized masked
   diffusion for discrete data. In NeurIPS, 2024.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language understanding by
  generative pre-training. 2018.
Subham Sahoo, Marianne Arriola, Yair Schiff, Aaron Gokaslan, Edgar Marroquin, Justin Chiu, Alexander Rush, and
  Volodymyr Kuleshov. Simple and effective masked diffusion language models. NeurIPS, 2024.
Jingyang Ou, Shen Nie, Kaiwen Xue, Fengqi Zhu, Jiacheng Sun, Zhenguo Li, and Chongxuan Li. Your absorbing
   discrete diffusion secretly models the conditional distributions of clean data. ICLR, 2025.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
  transformers for language understanding. In NAACL-HLT, 2019.
Shen Nie, Fengqi Zhu, Zebin You, Xiaolu Zhang, Jingyang Ou, Jun Hu, Jun Zhou, Yankai Lin, Ji-Rong Wen, and
  Chongxuan Li. Large language diffusion models. NeurIPS, 2025.
Jiacheng Ye, Zhihui Xie, Lin Zheng, Jiahui Gao, Zirui Wu, Xin Jiang, Zhenguo Li, and Lingpeng Kong. Dream 7b:
   Diffusion large language models. arXiv:2508.15487, 2025.
Chengyue Wu, Hao Zhang, Shuchen Xue, Zhijian Liu, Shizhe Diao, Ligeng Zhu, Ping Luo, Song Han, and Enze Xie.
  Fast-dllm: Training-free acceleration of diffusion llm by enabling kv cache and parallel decoding. arXiv:2505.22618,
  2025.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil
  Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv e-prints, 2024.
Marianne Arriola, Aaron Gokaslan, Justin T Chiu, Zhihan Yang, Zhixuan Qi, Jiaqi Han, Subham Sekhar Sahoo, and
 Volodymyr Kuleshov. Block diffusion: Interpolating between autoregressive and diffusion language models. ICLR,
 2025a.
Siyan Zhao, Devaansh Gupta, Qinqing Zheng, and Aditya Grover. d1: Scaling reasoning in diffusion large language
  models via reinforcement learning. NeurIPS, 2025a.
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang,
  YK Li, Y Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models.
  arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.
Jaeyeon Kim, Kulin Shah, Vasilis Kontonis, Sham Kakade, and Sitan Chen. Train for the worst, plan for the best:
  Understanding token ordering in masked diffusions. ICML, 2025a.
Heli Ben-Hamu, Itai Gat, Daniel Severo, Niklas Nolte, and Brian Karrer. Accelerated sampling from masked diffusion
  models via entropy bounded unmasking. NeurIPS, 2025.


                                                         13
Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Lu Jiang, Ce Liu, and William T Freeman. Maskgit: Masked generative image transformer.
  In CVPR, 2022.
Richard S Sutton, Andrew G Barto, et al. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press Cambridge, 1998.
R Duncan Luce. Individual choice behavior, volume 4. Wiley New York, 1959.
Robin L Plackett. The analysis of permutations. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series C: Applied Statistics,
  24(2), 1975.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
  algorithms. arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Alex Graves. Adaptive computation time for recurrent neural networks. arXiv:1603.08983, 2016.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert,
  Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. Training verifiers to solve
  math word problems. arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song, and Jacob
  Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. NeurIPS, 2021.
Shirui Chen, Jiantao Jiao, Lillian J Ratliff, and Banghua Zhu. dultra: Ultra-fast diffusion language models via
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.21446, 2025a.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri
 Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov,
 Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power,
 Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings,
 Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol,
 Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher
 Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight,
 Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya
 Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large language models trained on code, 2021.
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang, Carrie
  Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv:2108.07732, 2021b.
Zhangchen Xu, Yang Liu, Yueqin Yin, Mingyuan Zhou, and Radha Poovendran. Kodcode: A diverse, challenging,
  and verifiable synthetic dataset for coding. arXiv:2503.02951, 2025.
Zanlin Ni, Shenzhi Wang, Yang Yue, Tianyu Yu, Weilin Zhao, Yeguo Hua, Tianyi Chen, Jun Song, Cheng Yu,
  Bo Zheng, et al. The flexibility trap: Why arbitrary order limits reasoning potential in diffusion language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.15165, 2026.
Theo X Olausson, Metod Jazbec, Xi Wang, Armando Solar-Lezama, Christian A Naesseth, Stephan Mandt, and Eric
  Nalisnick. A tale of two temperatures: Simple, efficient, and diverse sampling from diffusion language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2604.09921, 2026.
Tal Schuster, Adam Fisch, Jai Gupta, Mostafa Dehghani, Dara Bahri, Vinh Tran, Yi Tay, and Donald Metzler.
  Confident adaptive language modeling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:17456–17472, 2022.
Qingyan Wei, Yaojie Zhang, Zhiyuan Liu, Dongrui Liu, and Linfeng Zhang. Accelerating diffusion large language
  models with slowfast: The three golden principles. arXiv:2506.10848, 2025.
Feng Hong, Geng Yu, Yushi Ye, Haicheng Huang, Huangjie Zheng, Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and Jiangchao Yao.
  Wide-in, narrow-out: Revokable decoding for efficient and effective dllms. arXiv:2507.18578, 2025a.
Pengxiang Li, Yefan Zhou, Dilxat Muhtar, Lu Yin, Shilin Yan, Li Shen, Yi Liang, Soroush Vosoughi, and Shiwei Liu.
  Diffusion language models know the answer before decoding. arXiv:2508.19982, 2025a.
Runpeng Yu, Xinyin Ma, and Xinchao Wang. Dimple: Discrete diffusion multimodal large language model with
  parallel decoding. arXiv:2505.16990, 2025.
Seo Hyun Kim, Sunwoo Hong, Hojung Jung, Youngrok Park, and Se-Young Yun. Klass: Kl-guided fast inference in
  masked diffusion models. NeurIPS, 2025b.




                                                         14
Jucheng Shen, Gaurav Sarkar, Yeonju Ro, Sharath Nittur Sridhar, Zhangyang Wang, Aditya Akella, and Souvik
  Kundu. Improving the throughput of diffusion-based large language models via a training-free confidence-aware
  calibration. arXiv:2512.07173, 2025.
Pengcheng Huang, Shuhao Liu, Zhenghao Liu, Yukun Yan, Shuo Wang, Zulong Chen, and Tong Xiao. Pc-sampler:
  Position-aware calibration of decoding bias in masked diffusion models. arXiv:2508.13021v2, 2025a.
Wen Wang, Bozhen Fang, Chenchen Jing, Yongliang Shen, Yangyi Shen, Qiuyu Wang, Hao Ouyang, Hao Chen, and
 Chunhua Shen. Time is a feature: Exploiting temporal dynamics in diffusion language models. arXiv:2508.09138,
 2025a.
Iskander Azangulov, Teodora Pandeva, Niranjani Prasad, Javier Zazo, and Sushrut Karmalkar. Parallel sampling
   from masked diffusion models via conditional independence testing. arXiv:2510.21961, 2025.
Yihong Dong, Zhaoyu Ma, Xue Jiang, Zhiyuan Fan, Jiaru Qian, Yongmin Li, Jianha Xiao, Zhi Jin, Rongyu Cao,
  Binhua Li, et al. Saber: An efficient sampling with adaptive acceleration and backtracking enhanced remasking for
  diffusion language model. arXiv:2510.18165, 2025.
Jinsong Li, Xiaoyi Dong, Yuhang Zang, Yuhang Cao, Jiaqi Wang, and Dahua Lin. Beyond fixed: Training-free
  variable-length denoising for diffusion large language models. arXiv:2508.00819, 2025b.
Shansan Gong, Ruixiang Zhang, Huangjie Zheng, Jiatao Gu, Navdeep Jaitly, Lingpeng Kong, and Yizhe Zhang.
  Diffucoder: Understanding and improving masked diffusion models for code generation. arXiv:2506.20639, 2025.
Xiaohang Tang, Rares Dolga, Sangwoong Yoon, and Ilija Bogunovic. wd1: Weighted policy optimization for reasoning
  in diffusion language models. arXiv:2507.08838, 2025.
Chengyu Wang, Paria Rashidinejad, DiJia Su, Song Jiang, Sid Wang, Siyan Zhao, Cai Zhou, Shannon Zejiang Shen,
  Feiyu Chen, Tommi Jaakkola, et al. Spg: Sandwiched policy gradient for masked diffusion language models.
  arXiv:2510.09541, 2025b.
Nianyi Lin, Jiajie Zhang, Lei Hou, and Juanzi Li. Boundary-guided policy optimization for memory-efficient rl of
  diffusion large language models. arXiv:2510.11683, 2025.
Kevin Rojas, Jiahe Lin, Kashif Rasul, Anderson Schneider, Yuriy Nevmyvaka, Molei Tao, and Wei Deng. Improving
  reasoning for diffusion language models via group diffusion policy optimization. arXiv:2510.08554, 2025.
Yuchen Zhu, Wei Guo, Jaemoo Choi, Petr Molodyk, Bo Yuan, Molei Tao, and Yongxin Chen. Enhancing reasoning
  for diffusion llms via distribution matching policy optimization. arXiv:2510.08233, 2025.
Yinjie Wang, Ling Yang, Bowen Li, Ye Tian, Ke Shen, and Mengdi Wang. Revolutionizing reinforcement learning
  framework for diffusion large language models. arXiv:2509.06949, 2025c.
Anthony Zhan.    Simple policy gradients for reasoning with diffusion language models.              arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2510.04019v2, 2026.
Zemin Huang, Zhiyang Chen, Zijun Wang, Tiancheng Li, and Guo-Jun Qi. Reinforcing the diffusion chain of lateral
  thought with diffusion language models. NeurIPS, 2025b.
Hanyang Zhao, Dawen Liang, Wenpin Tang, David Yao, and Nathan Kallus. Diffpo: Training diffusion llms to reason
  fast and furious via reinforcement learning. arXiv:2510.02212, 2025b.
Chunsan Hong, Seonho An, Min-Soo Kim, and Jong Chul Ye. Improving discrete diffusion unmasking policies beyond
  explicit reference policies. arXiv:2510.05725, 2025b.
Yuxuan Song, Zheng Zhang, Cheng Luo, Pengyang Gao, Fan Xia, Hao Luo, Zheng Li, Yuehang Yang, Hongli Yu, Xing-
  wei Qu, et al. Seed diffusion: A large-scale diffusion language model with high-speed inference. arXiv:2508.02193,
  2025.
Yuxin Ma, Lun Du, Lanning Wei, Kun Chen, Qian Xu, Kangyu Wang, Guofeng Feng, Guoshan Lu, Lin Liu, Xiaojing
  Qi, et al. dinfer: An efficient inference framework for diffusion language models. arXiv:2510.08666, 2025.
Yuchu Jiang, Yue Cai, Xiangzhong Luo, Jiale Fu, Jiarui Wang, Chonghan Liu, and Xu Yang. d2 cache: Accelerating
  diffusion-based llms via dual adaptive caching. arXiv:2509.23094, 2025.
Daniel Israel, Guy Van den Broeck, and Aditya Grover. Accelerating diffusion llms via adaptive parallel decoding.
  NeurIPS, 2025.




                                                        15
Andrew Campbell, Valentin De Bortoli, Jiaxin Shi, and Arnaud Doucet.           Self-speculative masked diffusions.
 arXiv:2510.03929, 2025.
Gabe Guo and Stefano Ermon. Reviving any-subset autoregressive models with principled parallel sampling and
  speculative decoding. arXiv:2504.20456, 2025.
Shutong Wu and Jiawei Zhang. Free draft-and-verification: Toward lossless parallel decoding for diffusion large
  language models. arXiv:2510.00294, 2025.
Sulin Liu, Juno Nam, Andrew Campbell, Hannes Stärk, Yilun Xu, Tommi Jaakkola, and Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli.
  Think while you generate: Discrete diffusion with planned denoising. ICLR, 2025a.
Marianne Arriola, Yair Schiff, Hao Phung, Aaron Gokaslan, and Volodymyr Kuleshov. Encoder-decoder diffusion
 language models for efficient training and inference. NeurIPS, 2025b.
Xu Wang, Chenkai Xu, Yijie Jin, Jiachun Jin, Hao Zhang, and Zhijie Deng. Diffusion llms can do faster-than-ar
  inference via discrete diffusion forcing. arXiv:2508.09192, 2025d.
Zigeng Chen, Gongfan Fang, Xinyin Ma, Ruonan Yu, and Xinchao Wang. dparallel: Learnable parallel decoding for
  dllms. arXiv:2509.26488, 2025b.
Parikshit Bansal and Sujay Sanghavi. Enabling approximate joint sampling in diffusion lms. arXiv:2509.22738, 2025.
Wenrui Bao, Zhiben Chen, Dan Xu, and Yuzhang Shang. Learning to parallel: Accelerating diffusion large language
 models via adaptive parallel decoding. arXiv:2509.25188, 2025.
Surat Teerapittayanon, Bradley McDanel, and Hsiang-Tsung Kung. Branchynet: Fast inference via early exiting from
  deep neural networks. In International conference on pattern recognition (ICPR). IEEE, 2016.
Emmanuel Bengio, Pierre-Luc Bacon, Joelle Pineau, and Doina Precup. Conditional computation in neural networks
 for faster models. arXiv:1511.06297, 2015.
Xin Wang, Fisher Yu, Zi-Yi Dou, Trevor Darrell, and Joseph E Gonzalez. Skipnet: Learning dynamic routing in
  convolutional networks. In ECCV, 2018.
Muzhi Dai, Chenxu Yang, and Qingyi Si. S-grpo: Early exit via reinforcement learning in reasoning models. NeurIPS,
 2025.
Daman Arora and Andrea Zanette. Training language models to reason efficiently. NeurIPS, 2025.
Jingyang Yi, Jiazheng Wang, and Sida Li. Shorterbetter: Guiding reasoning models to find optimal inference length
   for efficient reasoning. NeurIPS, 2025.
Guanghan Wang, Yair Schiff, Subham Sekhar Sahoo, and Volodymyr Kuleshov. Remasking discrete diffusion models
 with inference-time scaling. NeurIPS, 2025e.
Zemin Huang, Yuhang Wang, Zhiyang Chen, and Guo-Jun Qi. Don’t settle too early: Self-reflective remasking for
  diffusion language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.23653, 2025c.
Alexander Swerdlow, Mihir Prabhudesai, Siddharth Gandhi, Deepak Pathak, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. Unified
  multimodal discrete diffusion. arXiv:2503.20853, 2025.
Renping Zhou, Zanlin Ni, Tianyi Chen, Zeyu Liu, Yang Yue, Yulin Wang, Yuxuan Wang, Jingshu Liu, and Gao
  Huang. Co-grpo: Co-optimized group relative policy optimization for masked diffusion model. arXiv:2512.22288,
  2025.
Louis Bethune, Victor Turrisi, Bruno Kacper Mlodozeniec, Pau Rodriguez Lopez, Lokesh Boominathan, Nikhil Bhen-
  dawade, Amitis Shidani, Joris Pelemans, Theo X Olausson, Devon Hjelm, et al. The design space of tri-modal
  masked diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.21472, 2026.
Zihan Liu, Yang Chen, Mohammad Shoeybi, Bryan Catanzaro, and Wei Ping. Acemath: Advancing frontier math
  reasoning with post-training and reward modeling. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  ACL 2025, 2025b.
Diederik P. Kingma and Ruiqi Gao. Understanding diffusion objectives as the ELBO with simple data augmentation.
  In NeurIPS, 2023.




                                                       16
Appendix
The appendix is organized as follows:
   • In Appendix A, we provide an algorithm for our proposed policy sampling.
   • In Appendix B, we present additional plots to supplement the experiments from the main paper:
        – In B.1, we replicate Figure 1 across models (LLaDA, Dream) and datasets (GSM8K, MATH).
        – In B.2, we replicate Figure 4 with more baselines.
        – In B.3, we replicate Figure 4 using latency (wall-clock time) as the efficiency measure.
        – In B.4, we replicate Figure 4 for policies trained on Dream.
        – In B.5, we show results for the same setting as Figure 4a and Figure 4c but with a denser α-grid.
          We also show the spread of policies across different training seeds.
        – In B.6, we plot the impact of varying the policy temperature τπ .
        – In B.7, we provide model transfer results for the MATH dataset.
        – In B.8, we provide generation length (L) transfer results for the MATH dataset.
        – In B.9, we report results under non-greedy decoding.
        – In B.10, we conduct additional ablation experiments for our proposed policy design.
   • In Appendix C, we perform a qualitative analysis of our learned sampling policies.
   • In Appendix D, we visualize token generation trajectories.
   • In Appendix E, we describe dynamic Plackett-Luce sampling as an alternative to Bernoulli sampling.
   • In Appendix F, we detail our expert steering approach.
   • In Appendix G, we discuss an extended background on discrete diffusion models.
   • In Appendix H, we provide implementation and hyperparameters details.
   • In Appendix I, we visualize the architecture of our sampling policy.
   • Finally, in Appendix J, we include tabular versions of the main LLaDA results to simplify direct
     comparison in future work.




                                                     17
A   Policy Sampling Algorithm

Algorithm 1 Policy Sampling (full-diffusion setting BL = L)
             1: Input: Prompt x ∈ V d , maximum generation length L, maximum diffusion steps T , dLLM
                pθ , sampling policy πϕ (via fϕ ), policy temperature τπ
             2: Output: Generated sequence yT̂ , number of sampling steps
             3: yT ← (M , . . . , M )                                        ▷ Fully masked initial sequence
             4: MT ← {1, . . . , L}                                           ▷ Set of still-masked positions
             5: for t = T, T − 1, . . . , 1 do
             6:      if Mt = ∅ then
             7:          break                                         ▷ Stop generating when all unmasked
             8:      end if
             9:      pkt ← pθ (· | x, yt ), ∀k ∈ [L]                                   ▷ Token distributions
            10:      ckt ← maxv∈V pkt (v), ∀k ∈ [L]                                      ▷ Token confidences
            11:      ct ← (c1t , . . . , cL
                                          t )
            12:      mkt ← 1[k ∈ Mt ], ∀k ∈ [L]
            13:      bt ← fϕ (ct , mt , t)                                                     ▷ Policy logits
            14:      skt ← σ(bkt /τπ ), ∀k ∈ Mt
            15:      ukt ∼ Ber(skt ), ∀k ∈ Mt                                        ▷ Unmasking decisions
            16:      ukt ← 0, ∀k ∈    / Mt                                       ▷ Ignore already-unmasked
                         PL        k
            17:      if    k=1 ut = 0 then
                            ∗
            18:          ukt ← 1, k∗ = argmaxk∈Mt skt                                      ▷ Argmax fallback
            19:      end if
            20:      Utπ ← {k ∈ Mt | ukt = 1}
            21:        k
                     yt−1   ∼ pkt , ∀k ∈ Utπ                                                 ▷ Sample tokens
            22:        k
                     yt−1   ← ytk , ∀k ∈   / Utπ
            23:      Mt−1 ← Mt \ Utπ
            24: end for
            25: T̂ ← t
            26: return yT̂ , T − T̂




                                                           18
 B                  Additional Results

 B.1                Figure 1 replicated for {LLaDA-8B-Instruct, Dream-7b-Instruct} × {GSM8K, MATH-500}

                                                                                   Random                       High Confidence                         Fast-dLLM

                                                     80       Semi-AR                                                    35           Semi-AR
                                                              (BL = 32)                                                               (BL = 32)
                                                     70       Full-Diffusion                                             30           Full-Diffusion
                                                              (BL = 256)                                                              (BL = 256)
                                                     60


                                      Accuracy [%]
                                                                                                                         25
                                                     50
                                                                                                                         20
                                                     40
                                                                                                                         15
                                                     30
                                                     20                                                                  10

                                                     10                                                                      5
                                                          8          16                32          64     128     256             8         16         32          64   128        256
                                                                                            NFEs                                                            NFEs

                                                              (a) LLaDA on GSM8K                                                      (b) LLaDA on MATH-500

                                                     80       Semi-AR                                                                 Semi-AR
                                                              (BL = 32)                                                  40           (BL = 32)
                                                              Full-Diffusion                                                          Full-Diffusion
                                                     60       (BL = 256)                                                 30           (BL = 256)



                                      Accuracy [%]
                                                     40                                                                  20

                                                     20                                                                  10

                                                                                                                             0
                                                     0
                                                          8          16                32          64     128     256             8         16         32          64   128        256
                                                                                            NFEs                                                            NFEs

                                                              (c) Dream on GSM8K                                                      (d) Dream on MATH-500

 Figure 10 Performance comparison with (BL = 32;       ) and without (BL = 256; ) semi-AR generation. The same
 trend observed in Figure 1 holds across all models and datasets: confidence-based heuristics perform well under semi-
 AR generation but degrade significantly without it.


 B.2                    Figure 4 replicated using additional baselines


                                Random                                                              Fast-dLLM                           EB Sampler                             Ours (with ES)
                                High Confidence                                                     Margin                              Ours
               80                                                             80



Accuracy [%]                                                   Accuracy [%]
                                                                                                                             30                                           30
               60                                                             60
               40                                                             40                                             20                                           20

               20                                                             20                                             10                                           10
                    8     16   32   64 128 256                                     8        16     32   64 128 256                8    16        32    64     128 256          8     16   32   64   128 256
                               NFEs                                                                NFEs                                          NFEs                                     NFEs
               (a) GSM8K, BL = 32                                        (b) GSM8K, BL = 256                                 (c) MATH-500, BL = 32                        (d) MATH-500, BL = 256

 Figure 11 Figure 4 reproduced using additional baselines from (Kim et al., 2025a) and (Ben-Hamu et al., 2025). We
 observe our main findings still hold: our policies mainly match the performance of the best-performing baselines under
 the semi-AR regime (BL = 32) while outperforming them in the full-diffusion setting (BL = 256).




                                                                                                                        19
 B.3                    Figure 4 replicated using wall-clock time as the efficiency measure

                                  Random              High Confidence                       Fast-dLLM                              Ours                Ours (with ES)
               80                                    80



Accuracy [%]
                                                                                                 30                                               30
               60                                    60
               40                                    40                                          20                                               20

               20                                    20                                          10                                               10
                    0.5     1    2    4   8     16        0.5    1     2    4    8    16                 0.5        1    2     4    8   16             0.5        1        2        4    8   16
                          Wall-clock time (s)                   Wall-clock time (s)                            Wall-clock time (s)                            Wall-clock time (s)
               (a) LLaDA GSM8K                            (b) LLaDA GSM8K                                (c) LLaDA MATH                                (d) LLaDA MATH

 Figure 12 Figure 4 reproduced using wall-clock time (in seconds) as the efficiency metric instead of NFEs. The difference
 in our policy curves ( ) when measured in wall-clock time versus NFEs (see Figure 4) is minimal to non-existent,
 demonstrating the negligible computational overhead of our policy. This low overhead is primarily due to the small size
 of the unmasking model relative to the base dLLM (300K vs. 8B parameters in the case of LLaDA). All experiments
 run on A100 GPUs.


 B.4                    Figure 4 replicated for Dream-7b-Instruct

                                  Random              High Confidence                       Fast-dLLM                              Ours                Ours (with ES)
               80                                    80                                         40                                           40



Accuracy [%]
               60                                    60                                         30                                           30
               40                                    40                                         20                                           20
               20                                    20                                         10                                           10
                0                                    0                                           0                                            0
                    8       16   32   64 128 256          8     16    32    64   128 256             8         16       32   64    128 256        8          16       32       64       128 256
                                  NFEs                                 NFEs                                             NFEs                                          NFEs
               (a) GSM8K, BL = 32                     (b) GSM8K, BL = 256                       (c) MATH-500, BL = 32                        (d) MATH-500, BL = 256

 Figure 13 Results for Dream in semi-AR (Figure 13a & Figure 13c) and full-diffusion (Figure 13b & Figure 13d)
 generation regimes. For the policies we vary α ∈ {10, 3, 1, 0.3, 0} and use τπ = 0.5 for BL = 32 and τπ = 1 for
 BL = 256.




                                                                                           20
B.5    Controllability of learning unmasking policies with RL (via α)

                                            Random         High Confidence           Fast-dLLM          Ours

                                       80



                        Accuracy [%]
                                                                            30
                                       60
                                       40                                   20

                                       20                                   10
                                            8   16   32   64 128 256             8   16   32     64   128 256
                                                     NFEs                                 NFEs
                                            (a) GSM8K, BL = 32                   (b) MATH-500, BL = 32

Figure 14 BL = 32 results for LLaDA with a denser regularization grid, α ∈ {10.0, 9.0, . . . , 1.0, 0.3, 0.0}. Single training
seed due to cost; error bars show (min, max) over three test-time seeds. Note that for α ≥ 4.0, the change in NFEs is
not monotonic; different values lead to convergence either close to the α = 3.0 policy, or to that of α = 10.0. Points
for policy results are connected by α to emphasize the non-monotone behavior.



                                            Random         High Confidence           Fast-dLLM          Ours

                                       80



                        Accuracy [%]
                                                                            30
                                       60
                                       40                                   20

                                       20                                   10
                                            8   16   32   64 128 256             8   16   32     64   128 256
                                                     NFEs                                 NFEs
                                            (a) GSM8K, BL = 256                  (b) MATH-500, BL = 32

Figure 15 BL = 256 (GSM8K) and BL = 32 (MATH-500) results for LLaDA with all training seeds scattered. Even
for a fixed value of α, the resulting policy can vary in accuracy and speed due to the randomness of the training
procedure. Marker shape denotes the value of α.




                                                                       21
B.6   Impact of policy temperature τπ


                                         Ours (α = 1.0)         Ours (α = 0.3)             Ours (α = 0.0)
                         80                                                35
                                                                           30


          Accuracy [%]
                         60                                                25
                                                                           20
                         40
                                                                           15
                         20                                                10
                                                                            5
                              8     16    32      64      128   256             8    16     32     64       128   256
                                            NFEs                                             NFEs
                                  (a) GSM8K, BL = 32                                (b) MATH-500, BL = 32



                         80                                                35
                                                                           30


          Accuracy [%]
                         60                                                25
                                                                           20
                         40
                                                                           15
                         20                                                10
                                                                            5
                              8     16    32      64      128   256             8    16     32     64       128   256
                                            NFEs                                             NFEs
                                  (c) GSM8K, BL = 256                               (d) MATH-500, BL = 256

Figure 16 We study the effect of changing the policy temperature τπ (cf. Section 3.2). For each α ∈ {3, 0.3, 0}, we
construct a corresponding test-time Pareto frontier by varying τπ ∈ {1.5, 1.0, 0.5}. Interestingly, in some cases—such
as α = 0 with BL = 32—adjusting τπ enables an effective trade-off between compute and performance. Moreover, we
find that τπ = 0.5 is optimal in the semi-AR, while τπ = 1 performs best in the full-diffusion (BL = L = 256) setting.




                                                                      22
B.7   Model transfer results


                              Random              High Confidence            Fast-dLLM             Ours

                         80                                       40



          Accuracy [%]
                         60                                       30
                         40                                       20
                         20                                       10
                         0                                         0
                              8     16   32    64 128 256              8    16      32    64    128 256
                                          NFEs                                       NFEs
                                  (a) GSM8K, BL = 32                       (b) MATH-500, BL = 32

Figure 17 Model transfer results. We use policies trained on LLaDA and evaluate them on Dream with τπ = 0.5.
Encouragingly, transferred policies give comparable results to training Dream specific policies (cf. Figure 13a &
Figure 13c). Note that the α = 10 policy is represented separately by a ( ) in the lower left to avoid misleading
visualization when interpolating to α = 3.


B.8   Sequence-length transferability


        Random                        High Confidence         Fast-dLLM               Ours         Ours (with ES)

                         80                                       40



          Accuracy [%]
                         60                                       30
                         40                                       20
                         20                                       10
                          0                                        0
                              8 16 32 64 128 256 512                   8   16 32 64 128 256 512
                                          NFEs                                       NFEs
                                      (a) GSM8K                                  (b) MATH-500

Figure 18 BL = L = 256-trained policies from Section 4.2 evaluated with a 2x longer sequence length (BL = L = 512)
with τπ = 1. Note that the learned policies yield almost identical performance, while the heuristic methods degrade
further compared to L = 256 (cf. Figure 4b & Figure 4d). Both for LLaDA-8B-Instruct.




                                                             23
B.9            Non-greedy decoding results

                                                                                                           LLaDA-8B-Instruct, τ = 0.8

                                                                     pass@k                                               Majority Vote                                            ORM
                                   ∆@1: +1.15%                                                      87.5   ∆@1: +0.86%                                   95   ∆@1: +0.63%
                              95   ∆@32: +1.46%                                                            ∆@32: +0.91%                                       ∆@32: +2.97%
                                                                                                    85.0




               Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                                         90
                              90                                                                    82.5

    GSM8K
                                                                                                                                                         85
                              85                                                                    80.0

                              80                                                                    77.5                                                 80
                                                                         Fast-dLLM (λ = 0.6)
                              75                                         Policy (α = 1, τπ = 0.5)   75.0
                                                                                                                                                         75

                                   1                         2       4        8       16       32          1      2         4       8      16     32          1      2         4         8   16   32
                                                                         k                                                      k                                                   k

                              70   ∆@1: +0.80%                                                             ∆@1: +0.64%                                   55   ∆@1: +0.62%
                                                                                                     40
                                   ∆@32: +3.58%                                                            ∆@32: +1.30%                                       ∆@32: +2.22%
                              60                                                                     38                                                  50




    MATH-500   Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                     36                                                  45
                              50
                                                                                                     34                                                  40
                              40
                                                                                                     32                                                  35

                              30                                                                     30                                                  30
                                   1                         2       4        8       16       32          1      2         4       8      16     32          1      2         4         8   16   32
                                                                         k                                                      k                                                   k



Figure 19 We compare our policy (α = 1) sampling with Fast-dLLM (λ = 0.6) in BL = 32 setting under non-greedy
decoding (using temperature τ = 0.8). Left: we observe that policy sampling exhibits better scaling in terms of pass@k,
indicating that additional stochasticity due to Bernoulli sampling of unmasking decisions can help with exploring the
solution space compared to “deterministic” Fast-dLLM. Middle: when the final answer is picked based on majority
vote (i.e., self-consistency) policy sampling outperforms Fast-dLLM. Right: when then final answer is picked using an
outcome reward model (ORM; Liu et al. 2025b) instead, the policy sampling maintains its edge over Fast-dLLM. For
GSM8K, we use a subset of Ntest = 300 samples to ease computational burden.


B.10             Additional policy input ablations


                                                                                           GSM8k                                                  MATH-500
                                                                 0
                                                                     (+0.0 NFEs)           baseline: 75.1%, 45.8 NFEs                                  baseline: 34.0%, 58.4 NFEs




                                       Accuracy change (%)
                                                             −2

                                                                                                                                    (+0.8 NFEs)
                                                             −4


                                                             −6                            (+0.6 NFEs)
                                                                                                                                                       (+0.3 NFEs)
                                                                                                               (+0.6 NFEs)
                                                             −8
                                                                                                                                                                         (+1.2 NFEs)

                                                                          −t                  − mt               − t, mt                  −t              − mt               − t, mt


Figure 20 We perform (test-time) ablations on the policy inputs during generation. We use policy trained with α = 1
on LLaDA with BL = 32. Concretely, we set to zero either i) time (t), ii) masks (mt ), or iii) both. We report drops
in accuracy as (negative) bars and display the change in average NFEs as text underneath each bar. We observe that
zeroing out part of the input leads to reduced performance in all cases, except when zeroing out only time on GSM8K.
Interestingly, zeroing out time or masks seems to have a minimal impact on the speed of the policy (speed changes at
most for 1.2 NFEs on average).




                                                                                                                      24
C     What are RL unmasking policies actually doing?
To better understand the behaviour of our
learned policies, we conduct a qualitative anal-                   Random    High Confidence   Fast-dLLM     Ours    Ours (with ES)
ysis comparing generation/unmasking trajecto-
ries produced by our RL policies against a confi-
dence heuristic like Fast-dLLM (Wu et al., 2025).
We consider three settings that span different
points on the accuracy-efficiency Pareto frontier
and different generation regimes (see Figure 21):
     • BL32-slow ( ): Semi-AR (BL = 32)
       with Fast-dLLM (λ = 0.9) vs. Policy (α =                        (a) BL = 32                         (b) BL = 256
       0.3)
                                                             Figure 21 Results for LLaDA in semi-AR (BL = 32; replicated
     • BL32-fast ( ): Semi-AR (BL = 32)
                                                             from Figure 4a) and full-diffusion (BL = 256; figure repli-
       with Fast-dLLM (λ = 0.1) vs. Policy (α =
                                                             cated from Figure 4b) generation regimes. We highlight the
       10)                                                   policies used in our qualitative analysis of unmasking orders:
     • BL256 ( ): Full-diffusion (BL = L =                      for BL32-slow,       for BL32-fast, and      for BL256.
       256) with Fast-dLLM (λ = 0.9) vs. Policy
       (α = 0.3) vs. Policy with expert steering
       (α = 0.3)
Given a prompt x and generated answer ŷ (with a maximum answer length and maximum number of steps
to set to L and T , respectively), the unmasking order 4 is defined as o ∈ [T ]L , where ok := min{t | ytk ̸= M }
denotes the timestep when the token at position k is first unmasked. For presentation clarity, we reverse the
time axis relative to the main paper, so time flows as t = 1, 2, . . . , T . For all experiments, we use N = 100
GSM8K test samples with L = T = 256.
We describe main insights for each setting next.

C.1    BL32-slow
In this setting, our policy achieves performance
nearly identical to Fast-dLLM in both accuracy
and efficiency (see      in Figure 21a). Despite
these similarities, we find that the learned pol-
icy adopts a somewhat different sampling strat-
egy compared to plain confidence thresholding.
This is visually apparent in Figure 23, where we
observe that, although both strategies predom-
inantly follow a left-to-right generation pattern
(due to semi-AR regime), the policy’s unmasking
order lines ( ) display more "wiggliness" within     Figure 22 Spearman rank correlation between the unmasking
each block. This is due to the fact that, as shown   orders of Fast-dLLM and our RL policies per block for semi-
in Figure 24, the policy is far less likely to un-   AR policies considered here. Note that for certain blocks, the
mask adjacent tokens simultaneously—doing so         unmasking orders exhibit zero correlation: first and last block
for only around ∼ 20% of tokens, in contrast to      for BL32-fast( ), and last block for BL32-slow ( ).
Fast-dLLM, which does so for ∼ 65% on aver-
age. This suggests that the policy learns a more dispersed unmasking strategy, favoring token commitments
at scattered positions within each block rather than in contiguous chunks. Such a scattered approach may
enable the model to gather more diverse contextual information before finalizing neighboring tokens, poten-
tially mitigating errors that arise from parallel generation. The more scattered generation pattern within
each block is also evident in the token generation trajectories shown in Figure 27.
    4 Note that we consider partial orders here, as multiple tokens can be unmasked simultaneously.




                                                              25
Figure 23 BL32-slow: unmasking orders for policy sampling (oα=0.3 ) and Fast-dLLM (oλ=0.9 ) for four GSM8K test
samples under semi-AR generation (BL = 32, L = 256). Vertical dashed lines indicate the position where the model
outputs the end-of-sequence (EOS ) token. Interestingly, Fast-dLLM appears more effective at accelerating generation
after producing the EOS token, whereas policy sampling tends to sometimes waste compute by not unmasking all
padding tokens (within the current block) after EOS in parallel, see the third test sample.


The two methods also differ substantially in how they allocate compute across blocks. As shown in Figure 5a,
Fast-dLLM assigns a larger number of NFEs to earlier blocks, allocating ∼ 17 NFEs to the first block and
gradually decreasing to just ∼ 4 NFEs in the final block. In contrast, our learned policy distributes compute
almost uniformly across blocks, using ∼ 10 NFEs per block. This likely also contributes to the decreasing
Spearman rank correlation of unmasking orders between the policy and Fast-dLLM sampling across blocks
(see Figure 22).




Figure 24 BL32-slow: for each of the N = 100 samples, we report the frequency of tokens whose right-adjacent token
was unmasked at the same sampling step under Fast-dLLM versus our policy sampling. Interestingly, policy sampling
unmasks adjacent tokens much less frequently than Fast-dLLM.

C.2   BL32-fast
Here both strategies achieve very fast but low-accuracy sampling (see      in Figure 21a). However, policy
sampling significantly outperforms Fast-dLLM, achieving approximately ∼ 38% accuracy compared to ∼ 18%.
Examining the unmasking orders in Figure 25 and the average NFEs per block in Figure 5b, we observe that
policy sampling tends to slow down in the final block, typically generating the numerical answer last (see
also the token generation trajectory in Figure 29 and how the tokens of the numerical answer are generated
last under policy sampling). This behavior may help explain its improved performance over Fast-dLLM and
shows the promise of RL for discovering new sampling techniques.

C.3   BL256
Lastly, we consider the full-diffusion setting (BL = L = 256). While all three strategies achieve a comparable
number of NFEs (see        in Figure 21b), their accuracy differs significantly. The fact that these strategies


                                                        26
implement notably different sampling procedures is further evidenced by the low values of Spearman rank
correlations 0.26 ± 0.21 when comparing Fast-dLLM orders with policy sampling, and −0.24 ± 0.51 when
comparing Fast-dLLM with policy trained with expert steering. These differences are also reflected in the
divergent unmasking orders shown in Figure 26 (also refer to Figure 7 for a plot of average unmasking order
across samples).




Figure 25 BL32-fast: unmasking orders for policy sampling (oα=10 ) and Fast-dLLM (oλ=0.1 ) for four GSM8K test
samples under semi-AR generation (BL = 32, L = 256). Under low-NFE constraints, both strategies often predict all
tokens within a block simultaneously (as indicated by flat unmasking-order lines). In the final block, when generating
the numerical answer, the policy slows down.


Starting with Fast-dLLM ( ), we observe in Figure 26 that it often generates tokens in a "reverse" order
(right-to-left), see also the token trajectories in Figure 32). This behavior likely stems from the fact that
LLaDA did not exclude padding tokens from the loss computation during SFT (Nie et al., 2025) to preserve
the dLLM’s ability to generate sequences of varying (effective) lengths. Consequently, the model overfits
to padding tokens, which confidence-based methods like Fast-dLLM then mistakenly prioritize, leading to
their early generation. This helps explain the poor performance of confidence-based strategies observed in
Figure 1, highlighting the fragility of heuristic-driven approaches.
Looking at the unmasking orders of policy sampling ( ), the policy appears to implement a near-random
unmasking strategy, as there is little evident spatial structure in the unmasking order. This is encouraging,
as it suggests that the policy can learn to disregard corrupted signals—such as inflated confidence for padding
tokens—without explicit supervision, leading to more robust performance across different generation settings
(semi-AR vs full-diffusion). Lastly, we observe that the policy with expert steering ( ) generates in an
AR fashion (left-to-right). This behavior likely accounts for its superior performance in the full-diffusion
setting. It indicates that, during full-diffusion training, the policy is able to pick up the accuracy benefits of
AR generation from its expert demonstrations—drawn from the semi-AR regime (Appendix F)—while still
learning to generate significantly faster than a purely AR strategy that unmaskes one token at a time.




Figure 26 BL256: unmasking orders for policy sampling (oα = 0.3) and Fast-dLLM (oλ=0.9 ) for four GSM8K test
samples under full-diffusion generation (BL = L = 256).




                                                          27
D   Generation Trajectories Visualizations
Here we visualize token generation trajectories for the various sampling strategies considered in our work.
Specifically, for a randomly selected GSM8K test sample, we display the generated token at each of the
L = 256 positions, along with its unmasking time (shown in the bottom right corner of each cell, starting
from t = 0). For visual clarity, token cells are color-coded according to their unmasking time, with blue
indicating earlier and red indicating later unmasking. Note that for semi-AR generations, color-coding is
done within each block separately.


                     \n 1 James 3         buys 4          0
                                                               1     1
                                                                           0    2
                                                                                       suits 6       ,    2
                                                                                                              each 4 costing3        $    3
                                                                                                                                                 7    3
                                                                                                                                                            5    6
                                                                                                                                                                      0     6
                                                                                                                                                                                 .    2
                                                                                                                                                                                           He 4
            B=1
                    also 3     buys 3           5
                                                      1   3
                                                               0     4
                                                                         dress 2      pants 0        ,    5
                                                                                                              each 7 costing3             8
                                                                                                                                                 1    4
                                                                                                                                                            /    4
                                                                                                                                                                      7     4
                                                                                                                                                                                 5    2
                                                                                                                                                                                           0     5

                      = 11       $ 10      1 15       5 12     0 14        .   13
                                                                                    Additionally
                                                                                             15
                                                                                                     ,   15
                                                                                                               he 15      buys 16        14
                                                                                                                                                 3 14     shirts16   per 15     suit 15     ,   14
            B=2
                   costing17     $ 17      6 13       0   9
                                                              each 16      .   15
                                                                                       The 18      total 18   cost 18      for 20   the 20     suits 19     is 17          21
                                                                                                                                                                                 1 20      0 19

                      * 23       $ 23      7 22       5 22     0 26        = 22          $ 24       7 22        5 22        0 24    0 24         .   23
                                                                                                                                                           The 27    total 26   cost 25    for 22
            B=3
                     the 25    dress24    pants23     is 24         26
                                                                           1 27          0 22        * 24       $ 28        1 25    5 23         0 24       = 23       $ 27      1 23      5 24

                      0 30      0 33        .   29
                                                     The 29   total 29    cost 29       for 29     the 29     shirts33      is 31        35
                                                                                                                                                 1 32       0 32       * 32          37
                                                                                                                                                                                           3 35
            B=4
                      * 38       $ 33      6 37       0 35     = 34        $ 34          1 34       8 34        0 35        0 34     .   34
                                                                                                                                              Adding34    these35 amounts
                                                                                                                                                                       40
                                                                                                                                                                          together39      gives36

                     the 41    total 41   cost 42    of 43 everything
                                                                   46
                                                                           :   46
                                                                                         $ 48       7 45        5 47        0 46    0 48         + 50       $ 49      1 51       5 46      0 50
            B=5
                      0 44       + 49       $ 46      1 46     8 47        0 46          0 47       = 49        $ 51        1 45    0 50         8 49       0 45      0 46       .   52
                                                                                                                                                                                           \n 48

                     </ 54 reason54       ing 53     > 59     \n 54        < 53 answer54            > 54       \n 55        \ 54 boxed55         {   54
                                                                                                                                                            1 55      0 59       8 60      0 58
            B=6
                      0 56       }   54
                                           \n 55     </ 58 answer56        > 55 <EOS>61 <EoT>56 <EoT>54 <EoT>54 <EoT>62 <EoT>56 <EoT>53 <EoT>57 <EoT>54 <EoT>57

                   <EoT>63 <EoT>63 <EoT>63 <EoT>67 <EoT>69 <EoT>65 <EoT>64 <EoT>65 <EoT>68 <EoT>63 <EoT>63 <EoT>65 <EoT>64 <EoT>65 <EoT>67 <EoT>67
            B=7
                   <EoT>67 <EoT>70 <EoT>63 <EoT>65 <EoT>65 <EoT>63 <EoT>64 <EoT>68 <EoT>67 <EoT>63 <EoT>63 <EoT>63 <EoT>64 <EoT>66 <EoT>64 <EoT>68

                   <EoT>72 <EoT>73 <EoT>72 <EoT>74 <EoT>72 <EoT>76 <EoT>72 <EoT>74 <EoT>75 <EoT>72 <EoT>71 <EoT>77 <EoT>71 <EoT>73 <EoT>80 <EoT>75
            B=8
                   <EoT>71 <EoT>72 <EoT>78 <EoT>77 <EoT>72 <EoT>79 <EoT>73 <EoT>74 <EoT>71 <EoT>74 <EoT>74 <EoT>78 <EoT>71 <EoT>71 <EoT>74 <EoT>73



                                                                         Unmasking Time within Block (early              late)


                  Figure 27 BL32-slow: generation trajectory for policy sampling (α = 0.3, semi-AR).




                                                                                                   28
                 \n 0            1     1
                                                  .       2
                                                                James 4            buys 3                         4
                                                                                                                        1     4
                                                                                                                                   0     4
                                                                                                                                             suits 4              ,         5
                                                                                                                                                                                     and 6             each 7            suit 7        costs 7          $     7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7    7
      B=1
                  5    7
                                 0     7
                                                  .       8
                                                               Therefore
                                                                             12
                                                                                       ,       11
                                                                                                      the 12           total 12   cost 9     for 11              the 10             suits 11            is 11            \( 12          1 13           0 13           \ 13

                times 14              14
                                                  7 14               5 14              0 14               = 14               15
                                                                                                                                   7 14       5 14                0 14                0 14              \) 16 dollars17                  .   17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      \n 17           2 17
      B=2
                  .   17
                                The 19          dress19         pants18             cost 19           \(\ 21           frac 21      {   21
                                                                                                                                              1 21                }{ 20               5 21              }\ 21             )   21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        of 21         the 21      cost 21

                  of 22         each 31          suit 23             .       24
                                                                                   Since25            each 27          suit 26    costs 26    $ 26                7 26                5 26              0 26              ,   26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       each 29    dress29         pant 30
      B=3
                costs 29        \(\ 29          frac 28              {       29
                                                                                       1 29               }{ 29         5 29        }   29
                                                                                                                                              \ 29 times 29                                   29
                                                                                                                                                                                                        7 29              5 29          0 29           = 29               29

                  1 32           5 32             0 32              \) 32 dollars32                       .   32
                                                                                                                       \n 34       3 34       .       34
                                                                                                                                                               James35              buys 34                     34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1 34          0 34      dress34         pants33
      B=4
                  ,   34
                                and 36          each 37         dress38            pant 39           costs 39            $ 39      1 39       5 39                0 39                .       39
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Therefore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,   39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       the 39         total 39    cost 39

                 for 40         the 40          dress40         pants40                is 40              \( 40         1 40       0 40       \ 40 times 40                                   40
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1 40              5 40          0 40           = 40               40
      B=5
                  1 40           5 40             0 40               0 40              \) 40 dollars40                   .   40
                                                                                                                                   \n 40      4 40                .        40
                                                                                                                                                                                    James42            buys 41                42
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3 42      dress43         shirts42

                 per 45         suit 44           ,       44
                                                                    and 44         each 47           dress47           shirt 47   costs 46    $ 47                6 47                0 47              .       47
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Therefore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              47
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,   47
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      the 49      total 49
      B=6
                 cost 49        for 49           the 49         dress49            shirts49               is 48         \( 49      1 51       0 51                \ 51 times 50                                 51
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3 52          \ 53 times 53                     53

                  6 54           0 54             = 54                       54
                                                                                       1 54               8 54          0 54       0 54       \) 54 dollars54                         .       54
                                                                                                                                                                                                       \n 54              5 54           .   54
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Adding55              up 56
      B=7
                 all 57         the 58          costs 57             :       62
                                                                                       \( 61              7 62          5 62       0 62       0 60                + 62                        62
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1 62              5 62          0 62           0 59           + 62

                      63
                                 1 63             8 63               0 63              0 63               = 63               63
                                                                                                                                   1 63       0 63                8 63                0 63              0 63             \) 63 dollars63                .    63
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      \n 63
      B=8
                 </ 64 reason65                  ing 65              > 65              \n 63              \ 63 boxed63              {   63
                                                                                                                                              1 63                0 63                8 63              0 63              0 63          }    63
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <EOS>63 <EoT>63



                                                                                                     Unmasking Time within Block (early                        late)


      Figure 28 BL32-slow: generation trajectory for Fast-dLLM sampling (λ = 0.9, semi-AR).




             \n 0          To     0
                                           buys 0                        0
                                                                                  total 0             0       0
                                                                                                                       of    0
                                                                                                                                   the 0          ,        0
                                                                                                                                                                       ,        0
                                                                                                                                                                                          ,        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             the 0        total 1
B=1
             cost 0        of     0
                                            of        0
                                                                of       0
                                                                                   ,       0
                                                                                                      ,       0
                                                                                                                      pants 0     pants 0    pants 0             pants 0                  .        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                            .        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .   0

             \n 2          .      2
                                            .         2
                                                                .        2
                                                                                   .       2
                                                                                                      .       2
                                                                                                                        .    2
                                                                                                                                    .    2
                                                                                                                                                  .        2
                                                                                                                                                                       .        2
                                                                                                                                                                                          .        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                        <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2
B=2
            <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2

            <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 4 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3
B=3
            <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3

            <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5
B=4
            <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5

            <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6
B=5
            <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6

            <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7
B=6
            <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7

            <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8
B=7
            <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8

            <EoT> 9 <EoT> 9 <EoT> 9 <EoT> 9 <EoT> 9 <EoT> 9                                                            \n 11 <EoT> 9          </ 10 <EoT> 9                           ing 10                > 10              \n 9           < 10 answer10                 >       9
B=8
             \n 9          \      9
                                       boxed 9                  {        9
                                                                                   1 10               0 12              8 13       0 10        0           9
                                                                                                                                                                      }         9
                                                                                                                                                                                          \n 9              </ 9 answer9                     >    9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <EOS>9 <EoT> 9



                                                                                                    Unmasking Time within Block (early                          late)


             Figure 29 BL32-fast: generation trajectory for policy sampling (α = 10, semi-AR).




                                                                                                                                  29
            \n 0          To     0
                                          buys 0                       0
                                                                                total 0        0   0
                                                                                                             of   0
                                                                                                                        the 0          ,     0
                                                                                                                                                          ,     0
                                                                                                                                                                         ,    0
                                                                                                                                                                                      we 1        need 1              to        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    calculate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  the 0
 B=1
            cost 0        0      1
                                           of       0
                                                             each 1             item 1         ,   1
                                                                                                             ,    1
                                                                                                                            ,   1
                                                                                                                                       ,     1
                                                                                                                                                         and 1          then 2        sum 2       them 2              up 2             .      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .   2

            \n 3          ,      3
                                           1        3                  3
                                                                                 1    3
                                                                                               1   3
                                                                                                             0    3
                                                                                                                            0   3
                                                                                                                                       0     4
                                                                                                                                                          0     3
                                                                                                                                                                         0    3
                                                                                                                                                                                       0    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0        3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0      3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0   3
 B=2
             0       3
                          0      3
                                           0        3
                                                              0        3
                                                                                 0    3
                                                                                               0   3
                                                                                                             0    3
                                                                                                                            0   3
                                                                                                                                       0     3
                                                                                                                                                          0     3
                                                                                                                                                                         0    3
                                                                                                                                                                                       0    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0        3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0      3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0   3

             0       5
                          0      5
                                           0        5
                                                              0        5
                                                                                 0    5
                                                                                               0   5
                                                                                                             0    5
                                                                                                                            0   5
                                                                                                                                       0     5
                                                                                                                                                          0     5
                                                                                                                                                                         0    5
                                                                                                                                                                                       0    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0         5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0      5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0   5
 B=3
             0       5
                          0      5
                                           0        5
                                                              0        5
                                                                                 0    5
                                                                                               0   5
                                                                                                             0    5
                                                                                                                            0   5
                                                                                                                                       0     5
                                                                                                                                                          0     5
                                                                                                                                                                         0    5
                                                                                                                                                                                       0    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0         5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0      5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0   5

             0       6
                          0      6
                                           0        6
                                                              0        6
                                                                                 0    6
                                                                                               0   6
                                                                                                             0    6
                                                                                                                            0   6
                                                                                                                                       0     6
                                                                                                                                                          0     6
                                                                                                                                                                         0    6
                                                                                                                                                                                       0    6
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0        6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0         6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0      6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0   6
 B=4
             0       6
                          0      6
                                           0        6
                                                              0        6
                                                                                 0    6
                                                                                               0   6
                                                                                                             0    6
                                                                                                                            0   6
                                                                                                                                       0     6
                                                                                                                                                          0     6
                                                                                                                                                                         0    6
                                                                                                                                                                                       0    6
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0        6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0         6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0      6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0   6

             0       7
                          0      7
                                           0        7
                                                              0        7
                                                                                 0    7
                                                                                               0   7
                                                                                                             0    7
                                                                                                                            0   7
                                                                                                                                       0     7
                                                                                                                                                          0     7
                                                                                                                                                                         0    7
                                                                                                                                                                                       0    7
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0        7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0         7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0      7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0   7
 B=5
             0       7
                          0      7
                                           0        7
                                                              0        7
                                                                                 0    7
                                                                                               0   7
                                                                                                             0    7
                                                                                                                            0   7
                                                                                                                                       0     7
                                                                                                                                                          0     7
                                                                                                                                                                         0    7
                                                                                                                                                                                       0    7
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0        7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0         7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0      7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0   7

             0       8
                          0      8
                                           0        8
                                                              0        8
                                                                                 0    8
                                                                                               0   8
                                                                                                             0    8
                                                                                                                            0   8
                                                                                                                                       0     8
                                                                                                                                                          0     8
                                                                                                                                                                         0    8
                                                                                                                                                                                       0    8
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0        8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0         8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0      8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0   8
 B=6
             0       8
                          0      8
                                           0        8
                                                              0        8
                                                                                 0    8
                                                                                               0   8
                                                                                                             0    8
                                                                                                                            0   8
                                                                                                                                       0     8
                                                                                                                                                          0     8
                                                                                                                                                                         0    8
                                                                                                                                                                                       0    8
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0        8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0         8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0      8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0   8

             0       9
                          0      9
                                           0        9
                                                              0        9
                                                                                 0    9
                                                                                               0   9
                                                                                                             0    9
                                                                                                                            0   9
                                                                                                                                       0     9
                                                                                                                                                          0     9
                                                                                                                                                                         0    9
                                                                                                                                                                                       0    9
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0        9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0         9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0      9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0   9
 B=7
             0       9
                          0      9
                                           0        9
                                                              0        9
                                                                                 0    9
                                                                                               0   9
                                                                                                             0    9
                                                                                                                            0   9
                                                                                                                                       0     9
                                                                                                                                                          0     9
                                                                                                                                                                         0    9
                                                                                                                                                                                       0    9
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0        9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0         9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0      9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0   9

             0 10         0 10             0 10               0 10               0 10          0 10          0 10           0 10       0 10               0 10           0 10          0 10         0 10              > 10             0 10       \n 10
 B=8
            \n 10         \n 10            \ 10               {    10
                                                                                 {   10
                                                                                               1 10          0 10           0 10       0 10               }    10
                                                                                                                                                                        \n 10         \n 10         0 10              > 10             > 10 <EoT>10



                                                                                          Unmasking Time within Block (early                           late)


       Figure 30 BL32-fast: generation trajectory for Fast-dLLM sampling (λ = 0.1, semi-AR).




  \n 14          J   31
                              ol 36            ene 36             fills 16                21
                                                                                                   1 41           0    11
                                                                                                                                packs20          of 30 balloons42                 ,    32
                                                                                                                                                                                                with 23          each 30            pack 16 containing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    29

       29
                 3 26          0 18 balloons29                     .       29
                                                                                 Therefore
                                                                                          20
                                                                                                    ,   42
                                                                                                                  the 35        total 29 number25                   of 37 balloons24            they 47          start 49           with 48        is 46
   :   34
             \n 37            \[ 32                     40
                                                                   1 33              0 40           \ 32 times 39                     31
                                                                                                                                                 3 42               0 39          = 38                  32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3 39                0 37         0 39
   \ 42          ]   32
                              \n 32            \n 30              By 36              the 23        end 6          of   8
                                                                                                                                 the 5 afternoon
                                                                                                                                              26
                                                                                                                                                                    ,    10            28
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1 26             2 41 balloons18                 are 30
  left 25        .   26
                          Thus42                ,       26
                                                                  the 23 number15                  of 43 balloons44 thrown37                       is 22            :    21
                                                                                                                                                                                  \n 21          \[ 21                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3 22         0 35
   0 44          - 39                39
                                                1 30               2 43              = 41               33
                                                                                                                  2 35              8 28         8 22               \ 40          ]    29
                                                                                                                                                                                                \n 23            </ 38 reason23                   ing 26
  > 43       \n 21            \n 24             < 37 answer34                        > 37          \n 3           \ 29 boxed28                     {     27
                                                                                                                                                                    2 20          8 32           8 40             }        34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \n 32        </ 25
answer28      > 27 <EOS>39 <EoT>22 <EoT>35 <EoT>34 <EoT>18 <EoT>20 <EoT>32 <EoT>22 <EoT>20 <EoT>25 <EoT>36 <EoT>43 <EoT>28 <EoT>33
<EoT>24 <EoT>40 <EoT>43 <EoT>23 <EoT>34 <EoT>21 <EoT>14 <EoT>23 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 6 <EoT>30 <EoT>26 <EoT> 7 <EoT>35 <EoT>25
<EoT>12 <EoT>30 <EoT>20 <EoT>41 <EoT>22 <EoT> 3 <EoT>32 <EoT>16 <EoT>30 <EoT>40 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT>31 <EoT> 5 <EoT>20 <EoT>31
<EoT>30 <EoT>23 <EoT>15 <EoT>33 <EoT>34 <EoT>22 <EoT>13 <EoT>32 <EoT>19 <EoT>27 <EoT>18 <EoT>26 <EoT>13 <EoT>37 <EoT>33 <EoT>45
<EoT>10 <EoT>23 <EoT>28 <EoT>18 <EoT>21 <EoT>31 <EoT> 6 <EoT>15 <EoT>24 <EoT>43 <EoT>31 <EoT>27 <EoT>38 <EoT>23 <EoT>23 <EoT>15
<EoT>10 <EoT>23 <EoT>23 <EoT>11 <EoT>11 <EoT>17 <EoT> 9 <EoT>13 <EoT>35 <EoT> 4 <EoT>30 <EoT>32 <EoT>23 <EoT> 9 <EoT>39 <EoT>27
<EoT>37 <EoT>24 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 8 <EoT>36 <EoT>18 <EoT>20 <EoT>16 <EoT>38 <EoT>27 <EoT>27 <EoT>11 <EoT>42 <EoT>21 <EoT> 9 <EoT>37
<EoT>35 <EoT>31 <EoT>18 <EoT>31 <EoT>35 <EoT>29 <EoT>14 <EoT>19 <EoT> 4 <EoT> 2 <EoT>13 <EoT>11 <EoT>17 <EoT>36 <EoT>20 <EoT>15
<EoT>17 <EoT> 5 <EoT>36 <EoT>19 <EoT>16 <EoT>20 <EoT>24 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 9 <EoT>25 <EoT>37 <EoT>28 <EoT>23 <EoT>31 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 0



                                                                                                   Unmasking Time (early                   late)


            Figure 31 BL256: generation trajectory for policy sampling (α = 0.3, full-diffusion).




                                                                                                                       30
   \n 0           94
                       <EOS>95 <EoT>93 <EoT>92 <EoT>93 <EoT>91 <EoT>90 <EoT>89 <EoT>88 <EoT>87 <EoT>87 <EoT>86 <EoT>85 <EoT>85 <EoT>84
 <EoT>83 <EoT>82 <EoT>81 <EoT>80 <EoT>79 <EoT>78 <EoT>77 <EoT>76 <EoT>75 <EoT>74 <EoT>73 <EoT>73 <EoT>72 <EoT>72 <EoT>72 <EoT>71
 <EoT>71 <EoT>71 <EoT>71 <EoT>70 <EoT>70 <EoT>70 <EoT>70 <EoT>69 <EoT>69 <EoT>69 <EoT>68 <EoT>68 <EoT>67 <EoT>67 <EoT>66 <EoT>66
 <EoT>65 <EoT>65 <EoT>64 <EoT>63 <EoT>63 <EoT>62 <EoT>62 <EoT>61 <EoT>60 <EoT>59 <EoT>59 <EoT>58 <EoT>57 <EoT>56 <EoT>56 <EoT>56
 <EoT>55 <EoT>54 <EoT>53 <EoT>52 <EoT>51 <EoT>50 <EoT>49 <EoT>48 <EoT>47 <EoT>46 <EoT>45 <EoT>44 <EoT>43 <EoT>42 <EoT>41 <EoT>40
 <EoT>39 <EoT>38 <EoT>37 <EoT>36 <EoT>35 <EoT>34 <EoT>33 <EoT>32 <EoT>31 <EoT>30 <EoT>29 <EoT>28 <EoT>27 <EoT>26 <EoT>25 <EoT>24
 <EoT>23 <EoT>22 <EoT>21 <EoT>20 <EoT>19 <EoT>18 <EoT>18 <EoT>18 <EoT>17 <EoT>17 <EoT>17 <EoT>16 <EoT>16 <EoT>16 <EoT>15 <EoT>15
 <EoT>15 <EoT>14 <EoT>14 <EoT>14 <EoT>13 <EoT>13 <EoT>13 <EoT>12 <EoT>12 <EoT>12 <EoT>12 <EoT>11 <EoT>11 <EoT>11 <EoT>11 <EoT>10
 <EoT>10 <EoT>10 <EoT>10 <EoT>10 <EoT> 9 <EoT> 9 <EoT> 9 <EoT> 9 <EoT> 9 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 8 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7
 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 7 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 6 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5 <EoT> 5
 <EoT> 4 <EoT> 4 <EoT> 4 <EoT> 4 <EoT> 4 <EoT> 4 <EoT> 4 <EoT> 4 <EoT> 4 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3
 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 3 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2
 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 2 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1
 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1
 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1
 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 0 <EoT> 0 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 1 <EoT> 0



                                                                      Unmasking Time (early           late)


       Figure 32 BL256: generation trajectory for Fast-dLLM sampling (λ = 0.9, full-diffusion).




   \n 1      To    3
                       determine
                              2
                                     how 4     many 5 balloons6       were 6 thrown7         ,   9
                                                                                                          we 8           need 10     to 11 follow12     these13    steps13     :   13
   \n 13      1 14        .   15
                                   Calculate
                                          15
                                                the 15      total 15 number15     of 15 balloons15 initially19             .   16
                                                                                                                                    \n 17      2 17       .   17
                                                                                                                                                                   Sub 17    tract 17
   the 18 number18        of 17 balloons18      left 18      at 20     the 19    end 21      of 21        the 21 afternoon
                                                                                                                        22
                                                                                                                                    from 24    the 23    total 25 number24    of 24
 balloons
       24
              .   26
                         \n 27       \n 25     First 27      ,   28
                                                                       we 30 calculate31    the 30       total 30 number29           of 30 balloons30     :   32
                                                                                                                                                                    \n 33      -   33
  There37    are 36           36
                                      1 35       0 36      packs36     of 36 balloons36      .   37
                                                                                                          \n 37           -    37
                                                                                                                                    Each 37   pack 37 contains36        38
                                                                                                                                                                               3 37
    0 37 balloons36       .   37
                                     \n 37       -   39
                                                          Therefore
                                                                 41
                                                                        ,   40
                                                                                 the 40     total 40 number40             of 41 balloons40     is 42      \( 43     1 45       0 45
    \ 45 times 45             45
                                      3 45       0 44        = 45           45
                                                                                  3 45       0 45         0 44            \ 46       ). 46     \n 47     \n 45     Next 47     ,   46
   we 47 subtract48       the 47 number47       of 47 balloons47       left 47    at 49     the 48       end 50           of 50     the 50 afternoon
                                                                                                                                                  49
                                                                                                                                                          :   51
                                                                                                                                                                    \n 52      -   52
  There53    are 54           54
                                      1 54       2 54 balloons54       left 54     .   55
                                                                                            \n 56             -   55
                                                                                                                       Therefore
                                                                                                                               57
                                                                                                                                     ,   56
                                                                                                                                               the 55 number55      of 56 balloons56
 thrown56     is 56       \( 56       3 56       0 56        0 56       - 56           56
                                                                                             1 56         2 56            = 56           56
                                                                                                                                               2 56       8 56      8 56      \ 57
    ). 57    \n 57       </ 57 reason58        ing 57        > 57      \n 57      < 57 answer58           > 57           \n 57       \ 57 boxed57         {   57
                                                                                                                                                                    2 57       8 54
    8 58      }   58
                         \n 58       </ 58 answer58          > 58 <EOS>58 <EoT>58 <EoT>58 <EoT>58 <EoT>58 <EoT>58 <EoT>58 <EoT>58 <EoT>58 <EoT>58
 <EoT>58 <EoT>59 <EoT>58 <EoT>58 <EoT>58 <EoT>59 <EoT>59 <EoT>59 <EoT>59 <EoT>59 <EoT>59 <EoT>59 <EoT>59 <EoT>59 <EoT>59 <EoT>59
 <EoT>59 <EoT>59 <EoT>59 <EoT>59 <EoT>59 <EoT>59 <EoT>59 <EoT>59 <EoT>59 <EoT>59 <EoT>60 <EoT>60 <EoT>60 <EoT>34 <EoT>60 <EoT>60
 <EoT>60 <EoT>60 <EoT>60 <EoT>60 <EoT>60 <EoT>60 <EoT>60 <EoT>60 <EoT>60 <EoT>60 <EoT>60 <EoT>60 <EoT>38 <EoT>46 <EoT>60 <EoT>61
 <EoT>61 <EoT>61 <EoT>61 <EoT>61 <EoT>61 <EoT>61 <EoT>61 <EoT>61 <EoT>61 <EoT>61 <EoT>52 <EoT>60 <EoT>61 <EoT>61 <EoT>61 <EoT> 0



                                                                      Unmasking Time (early           late)


Figure 33 BL256: generation trajectory for policy sampling (α = 0.3, expert steering, full-diffusion).




                                                                                       31
E    Dynamic Plackett-Luce Sampling
We detail here the dynamic Plackett-Luce sampling (DPLS) strategy as an alternative to the Bernoulli
sampling (cf. Section 3.2) used in the main experiments of this paper. The name reflects the connection the
Plackett-Luce (PL) model proposed by Luce (1959) and Plackett (1975), with one key difference: the number
of selected items is not fixed but can vary freely between 1 and L.
Formally, the Plackett-Luce model operates as follows. Let bt = (b1t , . . . , bL
                                                                                t ) denote the unmasking logits
(corresponding to the output of policy network fϕ , same as in Section 3.2). Interpreting these scores as
unnormalized utilities associated with choosing each token for unmasking, under the PL model the likelihood
of any particular permutation σ := (σ1 , . . . , σL ) of the tokens is given by
                                                                 Y       exp(bσt l )
                                                P (σ | bt ) =          PL            σj .
                                                                 l∈[L]  j≥l exp(bt )


Informally, this corresponds to sampling all indices without replacement, where at each step the probability
of choosing an item is proportional to its (exponentiated) utility.
The Plackett-Luce model can be easily adapted to model sampling of a fixed-length ordered set Ut ⊆ [L] where
|Ut | = K. This is because the probability of any particular partial permutation is equal to the marginalization
over all permutations which complete it. Conretely, let Σ(Ut ) be the set of permutations which begin with
the sequence Ut , then it follows that
                                            X      Y         exp(bσt l )   Y        exp (bσt i )
                         P (Ut | bt ) =                    PL        σj =      P                  σj
                                                                                         ≥l exp (bt )
                                          σ∈Σ(Ut ) l∈[L]    j≥l exp(bt )  l∈Ut  j∈UtC ∪ Ut
                                                   |            {z         }
                                                           P (σ|bt )


where UtC denotes the complement of Ut , and Ut≥l denotes the indices which are in Ut at or after position l.
To extend the PL model to a variable-length unmasking sequence, we introduce a special STOP token with
fixed utility bSTOP = 0, and proceed as follows:
    1. Sample a single token l ∈ [L] to unmask

                                                            l ∼ softmax(bt /τπ )

       and initialize Utπ = {l}.
    2. Sample another token l′ from the renormalized distribution
                                                                           \U
                                                       l′ ∼ softmax([bt ; bSTOP ]/τπ )
                \U
       where [bt ; bSTOP ] denotes bt concatenated with bSTOP and with the logits of all previously selected
       indices l ∈ Utπ set to −∞.
    3. Add l′ to Utπ .
    4. If l′ was not STOP, repeat from 2.
As written above, this algorithm is not GPU-friendly due to the dynamic computation graph it implies.
However, it can be implemented in an efficient manner by treating the loop in steps 2-4 as a Gumbel-argsort
and simply masking out all actions which get sampled after STOP. Once the samples have been obtained, their
likelihoods can be efficiently computed in the same manner as in the fixed-length case above by marginalizing
over all actions which occur after STOP.




                                                                     32
F   Expert Steering
As mentioned in Section 4.2, we find that naïvely training confidence policies directly on full-diffusion gener-
ation (BL = L) task yields policies which beat out the heuristic methods, but underperform the ones trained
in the semi-AR setting (cf. Figure 4).
Since semi-AR decoding lies within the function class representable by the policy πϕ —that is, there is some
ϕ such that πϕ approximates the semi-AR setting—we hypothesize that our failure to obtain similar policies
is due to the vanishingly small probability of encountering autoregressive-like rollouts by chance. More
concretely, imagine trying to train a policy on a task for which purely AR generation is substantially more
effective than any other decoding strategy. In such a scenario, starting from a randomly initialized policy,
the probability of observing a rollout resembling a purely AR sequence is approximately 1/L! ≈ 0 (where L
is the generation length), making it extremely unlikely to sample such rollouts during RL training.
To try to eschew this problem, we devise the Expert Steering (ES) training strategy as follows. Formally,
letting πϕ denote the sampling policy to be learned, we simply replace it at train time only with the mixture
                                                                          E
                                                 G                   E X
                             πϕES (· | yt ) =       πϕ (· | yt ) +           δe (· | yt )
                                                G+E                G + E e=1

where G is the GRPO group size, E is the number of experts to mimic, and each Dirac distribution δe
represents a chosen deterministic "expert policy" (e.g., a heuristic method). Then in the outer loop of
GRPO, instead of sampling a group g ∼ πϕ of size G from πϕ , we simply sample an augmented group
g ′ ∼ πϕES of size G + E. In the inner loop of GRPO we proceed as normal, making sure to use πϕES when
calculating the likelihood ratios to avoid the training instabilities that would otherwise arise (as samples from
the Diracs may have likelihood ≈ 0 under πϕ )
In practice, for our experiments in Section 4.2 we use a single deterministic expert δe corresponding to Fast-
dLLM with λ = 0.9 and BL = 32, and force exactly one draw (E = 1) from this heuristic per group. The
effect is that if the policy is worse than this heuristic, that single sample will tend to have positive advantage,
causing the policy to be biased toward it. On the other hand, if the policy is better than the heuristic, it
will have negative advantage, causing it to be made less likely. Thus, expert steering encourages exploration
towards the expert—in this case, Fast-dLLM—while still allowing the policy to go beyond it, thanks to the
group relative loss in GRPO.




                                                           33
G    Extended Background
                                    The D3PM framework (Austin et al., 2021a) characterizes forward cor-
Masked vs. uniform discrete diffusion.
ruption via a Markov kernel Qt . Two canonical choices are (i) masked (absorbing-state) diffusion, which
maps every token toward a distinguished mask state M ,

                                          Qmask
                                           t    = (1 − αt )I + αt 1e⊤
                                                                    m,

with αt ∈ [0, 1], em denotes a one-hot vector (with dimension V ) for M token, and 1 represents a vector of
all 1s of size V , and (ii) uniform-state diffusion, which replaces tokens uniformly at random,
                                                                 αt ⊤
                                           Quni
                                            t   = (1 − αt )I +     11 .
                                                                 V
These differ in their limiting behavior and reverse constraints: Qmask
                                                                  t    has a point-mass stationary distribution
at M and induces a monotonic forward trajectory in the mask count (reverse steps deterministically move
from M → token), whereas Quni    t  has a uniform stationary distribution and permits token ↔ token substi-
tutions in both directions. The absorbing choice recovers the familiar MDM objective (cf. Equation (2.1))
under a particular reweighting (Ou et al., 2025) and thus ties masked LMs to discrete diffusion (Austin et al.,
2021a).

Continuous-time discrete diffusion. Recent work derives continuous-time limits (CTMC) for discrete diffusion
with absorbing corruption and shows that the training objective is a weighted time integral of token-wise
cross-entropy, with weight proportional to a signal-to-noise ratio term (e.g., αt /(1 − αt )). This yields a
simple, schedule-invariant objective, clarifies forward–reverse consistency, and improves optimization and
sampling without changing the prediction target (Shi et al., 2024; Sahoo et al., 2024). Conceptually, this
places masked diffusion on the same ODE/SDE footing as continuous-state diffusion (Kingma and Gao, 2023)
while retaining native discrete token inference.

                                             A complementary approach to discrete-state diffusion is to keep
Continuous-input diffusion for categorical data.
the diffusion process continuous in both time and input by operating on token embeddings. For example in
Dieleman et al. (2022), an orthogonal line embeds tokens into Rd and applies fully continuous diffusion in
both time and input space. Training can be done with cross-entropy via score interpolation, and sampling
uses ODE/SDE solvers with tools like classifier-free guidance. This preserves the continuous machinery but
introduces an embedding decoding interface and relaxes exact discreteness during the trajectory.

Summary of differences.

    • Masked (absorbing): monotonic reverse dynamics (M → token only); objective reduces to weighted
      MDM; pairs naturally with unmask-only sampling policies used in this work.
    • Uniform-state: non-monotone reverse dynamics (token ↔ token); encourages broader exploration but
      typically requires remasking/substitution moves and would thus complicate policy design.
    • Continuous-input: inherits continuous samplers and guidance; trades exact discreteness for an em-
      bedding path and decoding step.
We adopt the absorbing formulation in this work.




                                                       34
H   Training and Policy Network Configuration

                   Table 1 Training and policy configuration for our main experiments.


      Category         Parameter                         Value
                       Learning rate                     3e-5
                       LR scheduler                      Cosine
                       Warmup steps                      100
      Training
                       Effective batch size              16
                       Weight decay                      0.1
                       Max gradient norm                 0.2
                       Clipping factor (ϵ)               0.5 (0.2 for expert steering)
                       Training data                     GSM8K and MATH training set mixture
                       Num train epochs                  1
      GRPO             Group size                        8
                       β (KL penalty)                    0.0
                       Correctness reward r(y, yt )      We use d1 (Zhao et al., 2025a) rewards.
                       Number of transformer blocks      1
                       Hidden dimension                  128
                       Feedforward dimension             512
      Policy Network
                       Number of heads                   2
                       Time embedding dim                128
                       Total parameter count             300K




                                                   35
I   Policy Architecture Diagram

              c = confidence      m = mask      t = timestep     k = top-k          d = hidden_dim



                                  c                 m                   t
                                       (L, k)        (L, )                  (1, )




                                 Proj             Emb               Sin Emb
                      (L, d)                         (L, d)                   (L, dt )


                                                                      MLP
                                                    +
                                                                              (L, d)
                               AdaLN                    (L, d)

                      (L, d)


                         Attn+RoPE
                      (L, d)


                                  +

                        (L, d)


                               AdaLN
                      (L, d)


                                 MLP
                      (L, d)


                                  +

                        (L, d)


                                 LN
                      (L, d)


                                 Proj
                               (L, )




                                                     36
J   Tabular Reference for Main LLaDA Experiments
In this appendix we include tabular results for the main LLaDA experiments so that future work can compare
exact numbers more easily. All values correspond directly to the plotted points.




                                                   37
       Table 2 BL = 32, GSM8K.                    Table 3 BL = 32, MATH.


Method         NFE     Accuracy (%)        Method         NFE     Accuracy (%)
                 8.0    20.6                                8.0     7.6
                16.0    24.4 ± 0.1                         16.0    10.6 ± 0.5
                32.0    28.4 ± 1.1                         32.0    12.5 ± 0.9
Random                                     Random
                64.0    46.6 ± 0.3                         64.0    17.9 ± 0.4
               128.0    63.2 ± 1.9                        128.0    22.7 ± 1.2
               256.0    72.6 ± 1.1                        256.0    26.8 ± 1.9
                 8.0    20.6                                8.0     7.6
                16.0    30.6                               16.0    17.0
                32.0    46.9                               32.0    20.4
High Conf.                                 High Conf.
                64.0    70.0                               64.0    27.8
               128.0    76.1                              128.0    33.2
               256.0    79.5                              256.0    35.6
                10.6    17.5                               11.4     7.4
                21.5    22.0                               26.5    11.0
                28.7    39.7                               36.9    16.6
                32.6    54.0                               43.9    20.0
                37.1    63.0                               49.7    26.4
Fast-dLLM                                  Fast-dLLM
                43.2    72.6                               57.6    28.4
                51.9    76.6                               68.1    32.4
                64.4    79.2                               81.6    33.8
                82.2    79.7                              100.7    34.4
               256.0    79.5                              256.0    35.6
                 8.0    20.9                                8.0     8.4
                16.0    30.6                               16.0    14.2
                32.0    49.4                               32.0    21.6
Margin                                     Margin
                64.0    69.6                               64.0    27.8
               128.0    74.2                              128.0    30.8
               256.0    78.8                              256.0    35.8
                15.1    22.8                               15.4    10.2
                23.0    29.2                               23.8    16.0
                31.0    48.4                               34.4    19.2
                37.6    64.6                               44.8    25.6
EB Sampler                                 EB Sampler
                46.9    74.2                               58.4    27.2
                54.9    77.6                               69.0    33.8
                66.6    80.4                               85.0    33.0
               249.0    80.8                              251.0    36.0
                10.3    35.2 ± 0.3                         10.8    15.3 ± 0.2
                46.2    75.5 ± 0.7                         59.1    31.5 ± 1.0
Ours            50.7    76.6 ± 0.2         Ours            64.6    31.9 ± 0.6
                82.7    80.0 ± 0.3                        100.2    34.1 ± 1.0
               135.8    80.5 ± 0.5                        153.4    35.1 ± 0.1




                                      38
    Table 4 BL = 256, GSM8K.                    Table 5 BL = 256, MATH.


Method       NFE     Accuracy (%)        Method         NFE     Accuracy (%)
               8.0    19.5 ± 0.5                          8.0    11.5 ± 1.0
              16.0    30.6 ± 0.8                         16.0    13.5 ± 0.2
              32.0    39.8 ± 0.9                         32.0    14.8 ± 0.8
Random                                   Random
              64.0    47.3 ± 0.1                         64.0    17.9 ± 1.0
             128.0    48.9 ± 1.1                        128.0    18.3 ± 0.2
             256.0    51.6 ± 1.2                        256.0    18.5 ± 2.7
               8.0    12.4                                8.0    10.6
              16.0    37.3                               16.0    16.6
              32.0    43.6                               32.0    20.2
High Conf.                               High Conf.
              64.0    38.9                               64.0    20.8
             128.0    32.2                              128.0    19.8
             256.0    33.6                              256.0    20.2
              11.0    19.6                                8.4     9.4
              15.8    32.2                               17.4    12.6
              22.5    37.2                               26.6    16.4
              32.1    38.7                               37.2    17.4
Fast-dLLM
              44.5    35.9               Fast-dLLM       49.9    20.8
              60.8    33.8                               64.5    18.4
              91.8    33.0                               81.9    19.6
             256.0    33.6                              106.7    20.2
                                                        256.0    20.2
               8.0    20.1
              16.0    37.4                                8.0    12.4
              32.0    45.9                               16.0    18.4
Margin
              64.0    39.3                               32.0    20.2
                                         Margin
             128.0    30.4                               64.0    20.4
             256.0    34.6                              128.0    17.6
                                                        256.0    21.6
              10.5    11.6
              15.8    24.9                               12.0    10.0
              21.8    32.6                               19.2    13.4
              29.2    36.1                               26.5    16.8
EB Sampler
              43.6    29.5                               35.4    17.8
                                         EB Sampler
              57.9    26.7                               52.0    18.4
              74.2    35.0                               69.0    17.6
             250.4    32.5                               87.6    21.4
                                                        250.8    20.2
              13.0    48.3 ± 0.6
              18.5    51.9 ± 0.9                         14.5    18.8 ± 1.8
Ours          27.1    54.8 ± 0.4                         22.3    19.8 ± 1.0
              50.5    56.1 ± 0.9         Ours            33.7    19.9 ± 0.4
              93.3    61.8 ± 1.1                         61.6    21.0 ± 1.3
                                                        121.5    22.9 ± 1.0
              15.7    50.6 ± 0.8
              20.6    51.9 ± 0.2                         17.5    17.7 ± 1.1
Ours (ES)     70.5    77.2 ± 0.4                         23.1    19.8 ± 0.2
              72.4    76.7 ± 0.5         Ours (ES)       86.7    31.4 ± 0.5
              87.9    75.1 ± 0.1                         90.1    30.1 ± 1.8
                                                         98.0    31.0 ± 0.8




                                    39
